2018.03.21
CHAIRMAN POWELL. Good afternoon. I have a brief statement, and then I'll be happy to respond to your questions. The job market remains strong, the economy continues to expand, and inflation appears to be moving toward the FOMC's 2 percent longer-run goal. As you already know, we decided today to raise the target rate for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, bringing it to 1-1/2to 1-3/4 percent. This decision marks another step in the ongoing process of gradually scaling back monetary policy accommodation-- a process that has been under way for several years now. Job gains averaged 240,000 per month over the past three months, well above the pace needed in the longer run to absorb new entrants into the labor force. The unemployment rate remained low in February at 4.1 percent, while the labor force participation rate moved higher. Over the past four years, the participation rate has remained roughly unchanged. That's a sign of improvement, given that the aging of our population is putting downward pressure on the participation rate, and we expect that the job market will remain strong. Although the growth rates of household spending and business investment appear to have moderated early this year, gains in the fourth quarter were strong and the fundamentals underpinning demand remain solid. Indeed, the economic outlook has strengthened in recent months. Several factors are supporting the outlook: Fiscal policy has become more stimulative, ongoing job gains are boosting incomes and confidence, foreign growth is on a firm trajectory, and overall financial conditions remain accommodative. Against this backdrop, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer-run objective. Overall consumer prices, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, increased 1.7 percent in the 12 months ending in January. The core price index, which excludes the prices of energy and food and is typically a better indicator of future inflation, rose 1.5 percent over the same period. However, as we have noted for some time, the shortfall of inflation from 2 percent reflects, at least partly, some unusual price declines that occurred nearly a year ago. In coming months, as those earlier declines drop out of the calculation, inflation should move up closer to 2 percent and stabilize around that level over the medium term. Of course, various forces will continue to affect inflation. At times it may be above 2 percent, just as at times it may be below. Our inflation objective is symmetric in the sense that we are trying to prevent persistent deviations from 2 percent in either direction. Based on the projections that Committee participants submitted for this meeting, the median projection for the growth of inflation-adjusted GDP is 2.7 percent this year, 2.4 percent next year, and 2 percent in 2020, a bit above its estimated longer-run rate. The median projection for unemployment-- for the unemployment rate stands at 3.8 percent in the fourth quarter of this year and runs at 3.6 percent over the next two years, almost a percentage point below the median estimate of its longer-run normal rate. Finally, the median inflation projection is 1.9 percent this year, 2 percent next year, and 2.1 percent in 2020. Compared with the projections made in December, real GDP growth is stronger, the unemployment rate is lower, and inflation is slightly higher. As I noted earlier, today's decision to raise the federal funds rate is another step in the process of gradually scaling back monetary policy accommodation as the economic expansion continues. This gradual process has been under way for more than two years, and it has served-- and should continue to serve-- the economy well. In making our policy decisions over the next few years, we will continue to aim for inflation of 2 percent while sustaining the economic expansion and a strong labor market. In the Committee's view, further gradual increases in the federal funds rate will best promote these goals. By contrast, raising rates too slowly would raise the risk that monetary policy would need to tighten abruptly down the road, which could jeopardize the economic expansion. At the same time, we want to avoid inflation running persistently below our objective, which could leave us with less scope to counter an economic downturn in the future. Participants' projections of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate reflect our gradual approach. The median projection for the federal funds rate is 2.1 percent at the end of this year, 2.9 percent at the end of 2019, and 3.4 percent at the end of 2020. By 2020, the median federal funds rate is modestly above its estimated longer-run trend. Most participants revised up their projections since December, although the median projection for this year did not change. The medians for 2019 and 2020 are somewhat higher than in December. Of course, we'll be watching how the economy evolves in the months and years ahead relative to our maximum employment and price stability objectives. If the outlook changes, we will adjust monetary policy appropriately. Finally, I'll note that our program for reducing our balance sheet, which began in October, is proceeding smoothly. Barring a very significant and unexpected weakening in the outlook, we do not intend to alter this program. As we've said, changing the target range for the federal funds rate is our primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. As always, the Committee would be prepared to use its full range of tools if future economic conditions were to warrant a more accommodative monetary policy than can be achieved solely by reducing the federal funds rate. Thank you, and I'll be happy to take your questions now. 





2018.06.13
Transcript of Chairman Powell's Press Conference June 13, 2018 CHAIRMAN POWELL. Good afternoon. Thanks very much for being here. I know that a number of you will want to talk about the details of our announcement today, and I am happy to do that in a few minutes. But because monetary policy affects everyone, I want to start with a plain-English summary of how the economy is doing, what my colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve are trying to do, and why. The main takeaway is that the economy is doing very well. Most people who want to find jobs are finding them, and unemployment and inflation are low. Interest rates have been low for some years while the economy has been recovering from the financial crisis. For the past few years, we have been gradually raising interest rates, and along the way we've tried to explain the reasoning behind our decisions. In particular, we think that gradually returning interest rates to a more normal level as the economy strengthens is the best way the Fed can help sustain an environment in which American households and businesses can thrive. Today, we've taken another step in that process by raising our target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 of a percentage point. My colleagues and I meet eight times a year and take a fresh look each time at what is happening in the economy and consider whether our policy needs adjusting. We don't put our interest rate decisions on hold or on autopilot, because the economy can always evolve in unexpected ways. History has shown that moving interest rates either too quickly or too slowly can lead to bad economic outcomes. We think the outcomes are likely to be better overall if we are as clear as possible about what we are likely to do and why. To that end, we try to give a sense of our expectations for how the economy will evolve and how our policy stance may change. As Chairman, I hope to foster a public conversation about what the Fed is doing to support a strong and resilient economy. And one practical step in doing so is to have a press conference like this after every one of our scheduled FOMC meetings. And we're going to do that beginning in January. That will give us more opportunities to explain our actions and to answer your questions. I want to point out that having twice as many press conferences does not signal anything about the timing or pace of future interest rate changes. This change is only about improving communications. My FOMC colleagues and I will also continue to issue our economic projections on the existing quarterly schedule. Now, let me go into more detail over developments in the economy, our economic projections, and our policy decision. Economic growth appears to have picked up in the current quarter, largely reflecting a bounceback in household spending. Business investment continues to grow strongly, and the overall outlook for growth remains favorable. Several factors support this assessment: Fiscal policy is boosting the economy, ongoing job gains are raising incomes and confidence, foreign economies continue to expand, and overall financial conditions remain accommodative. These observations are consistent with the projections that Committee participants submitted for this meeting. The median projection for the growth of real GDP is 2.8 percent this year, 2.4 percent next year, and 2 percent in 2020. Compared with the projections made in March, this median growth path is little changed. In the labor market, job gains averaged 180,000 per month over the past three months, well above the pace needed in the longer run to provide jobs for new entrants into the workforce. The unemployment rate declined over the past two months and stood at 3.8 percent in May, its lowest level in nearly two decades. Meanwhile, the labor force participation rate has been roughly unchanged since late 2013. That is a positive sign, given that the aging of our population is putting downward pressure on the participation rate. And we expect the job market to remain strong. As you can see in our Summary of Economic Projections, the median of Committee participants' projections for the unemployment rate stands at 3.6 percent in the fourth quarter of this year and runs at 3.5 percent over the next two years, a percentage point below the median estimate of its longer-run normal rate. This median path is just a bit lower than that from March. After many years of running below our 2 percent longer-run objective, inflation has recently moved close to that level. Indeed, overall consumer prices, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, increased 2 percent over the 12 months ending in April. The core PCE index, which excludes prices of energy and food and tends to be a better indicator of future inflation, rose 1.8 percent over the same period. As we had expected, inflation moved up as the unusually low readings from last March dropped out of the calculation. The recent inflation data have been encouraging, but after many years of inflation below our objective, we do not want to declare victory. We want to ensure that inflation remains near our symmetric 2 percent longer-run goal on a sustained basis. As we note in our Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, the Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below our 2 percent objective. Of course, many factors affect inflation-some temporary and others more lasting-and at any given time inflation may be above or below 2 percent. For example, the recent rise in oil prices will likely push inflation somewhat above 2 percent in coming months. But that transitory development should have little, if any, consequence for inflation over the next few years. The median of participants' projections for inflation runs at 2.1 percent through 2020. Relative to the March projections, the median inflation projection is a little higher this year and next. As I mentioned, today we took another step in gradually scaling back monetary policy accommodation by raising the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, bringing it to 1 3/4 to 2 percent. We also made some changes to our policy statement, reflecting that policy normalization is proceeding broadly as we have expected. None of these changes signals a change in our policy views. For example, we removed the language stating that "the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run." Since we introduced that language a few years ago, the economy has strengthened, and the Committee has raised the federal funds rate from near 0 to 1 3/4 to 2 percent. As we continue to note in our statement, we expect to make further gradual increases in that rate. As a result, if the economy evolves broadly as we anticipate, the federal funds rate will, over the next year or so, move well within the range of estimates of the normal long-run level. Therefore, we thought that now is an appropriate time to remove this forward guidance from our policy statement. We continue to believe that a gradual approach for increasing the federal funds rate will best promote a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent goal. We are aware that raising rates too slowly might raise the risk that monetary policy would need to tighten abruptly down the road in response to an unexpectedly sharp increase in inflation or financial excesses, jeopardizing the economic expansion. Conversely, if we raise interest rates too rapidly, the economy could weaken, and inflation could continue to run persistently below our objective. The Committee's gradual approach is reflected in participants' projections for the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. The median projection for the federal funds rate is 2.4 percent at the end of this year, 3.1 percent at the end of 2019, and 3.4 percent at the end of 2020. By 2020, the median federal funds rate is modestly above its estimated longer-run level. These projections are very similar to those made in March. Although the median federal funds rate edged up this year and next, most participants did not revise their projections. I'll conclude by mentioning two additional matters. First, our program for reducing our balance sheet, which began in October, is proceeding smoothly. Barring a material and unexpected weakening in the outlook, this program will proceed on schedule, and our balance sheet will continue to shrink. As we have said, changing the target range for the federal funds rate is our primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. And, finally, as discussed in the minutes of our May meeting, we're making a small technical adjustment in one of our tools for implementing monetary policy. To keep the federal funds rate in the target range, we rely on the rate of interest on excess reserves, or the IOER rate. Up until now, we have set the IOER rate at the top of the target range for the federal funds rate. In recent months, the federal funds rate has moved up toward the IOER rate as short-term interest rates have risen more generally. So to move the federal funds rate closer to the middle of the target range, we are now setting the IOER rate 5 basis points below the upper end of the target range. This minor technical adjustment has no bearing on the appropriate path for the federal funds rate or financial conditions more generally. Thanks for listening, and I'll be happy to take your questions. 





2018.09.26
Transcript of Chairman Powell's Press Conference September 26, 2018 CHAIRMAN POWELL: Good afternoon, everyone. Thanks for being here. I am going to start with an overview of how my colleagues and I see the economy, what we decided today, and then a bit about our expectations for the months ahead. Our economy is strong. Growth is running at a healthy clip. Unemployment is low, the number of people working is rising steadily, and wages are up. Inflation is low and stable. All of these are very good signs. Of course, that's not to say that everything is perfect. The benefits of this strong economy have not reached all Americans. Many of our country's economic challenges are beyond the scope of the Fed, but my colleagues and I are doing all we can to keep the economy strong, healthy, and moving forward. That is the best way we can promote an environment in which every American has the opportunity to succeed. Each time my colleagues and I meet, we face the same question: How can we set policy to best support job growth and low, steady inflation? For many years, this question called for very low interest rates to help an economy that had been damaged by the deep financial crisis that gripped the world 10 years ago. As the economy has steadily gained strength, the Fed has been gradually returning interest rates closer to levels that are normal in a healthy economy. We took another step on that path today with a quarter-point increase in short-term interest rates. These rates remain low, and my colleagues and I believe that this gradual return to normal is helping to sustain this strong economy for the longer-run benefit of all Americans. As I mentioned, 10 years have now passed since the depths of the financial crisis-a painful part of our history that cost many Americans their jobs, their homes, and, for some, their hopes and dreams. In addition to holding interest rates low to support the recovery, we have also taken many steps to make the financial system safer. In particular, we're holding the largest banks to much higher standards in the amount of capital and liquidity they hold and in the ways they assess and manage the risks they take. I am confident that the system today is stronger and in a far better position to support the financial needs of households and businesses through good times and bad. We continue to work to sustain these fundamental improvements while also ensuring that regulation is both effective and efficient. Now, let me go into more detail about the developments that motivated today's policy decision. Both household spending and business investment are expanding briskly, and the overall growth outlook remains favorable. And several factors support this assessment: Fiscal policy is boosting the economy, ongoing job gains are raising incomes and confidence, and overall financial conditions remain accommodative. These conditions are consistent with our Summary of Economic Projections for this meeting. The median of Committee participants' projections for the growth of real GDP is 3.1 percent this year and 2.5 percent next year. Job gains averaged 185,000 per month over the last three months, well above the pace needed in the longer run to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force. The unemployment rate stood at 3.9 percent in August and has been near that level since April. Smoothing through month-to-month variations, the labor force participation rate remains about where it was in late 2013-a positive sign, given that the aging of our population is putting downward pressure on participation. We expect the job market to remain strong. And the median of Committee participants' projections for the unemployment rate later this year is 3.7 percent and a bit lower than that in 2019. Overall consumer prices, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE inflation), increased 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in July. The core price index, which excludes the prices of energy and food and tends to be a better indicator of future inflation, rose 2 percent over the same period. The FOMC seeks, and expects to see, inflation remaining near our 2 percent longer-run objective on a sustained basis. At any given time, inflation may be somewhat above or below 2 percent. For example, the recent rise in oil prices has pushed inflation a little above 2 percent, but we expect this to be transitory, as is reflected in our projections. The median projections for both the overall and core inflation measures remain very close to 2 percent across the whole projection horizon. Today the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, bringing it to 2 to 2¼ percent. This action reflects the strength we see in the economy and is one more step in the process that we began almost three years ago of gradually returning interest rates to more normal levels. Looking ahead, today's projections show gradual interest rate increases continuing roughly as foreseen in June. The median of participants' views on appropriate policy through 2020 are unchanged since the June meeting. These projections play an important role in our work. My colleagues and I believe that it's useful to communicate our views on likely prospects for the economy and for policy. We are well aware, however, that the economy regularly surprises, and that even the most carefully constructed projections are highly uncertain. The projections about the appropriate path of policy assume that the economy evolves broadly in line with the projections for growth, employment, unemployment, and inflation. If the economy were instead to falter, lower interest rates would be appropriate. Conversely, if inflationary pressures were to rise more than expected, higher interest rates would be appropriate. Right now, as our statement indicates, risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. Readers of the FOMC statement likely noted that the Committee dropped a sentence that indicated that "the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative." This change does not signal any change in the likely path of policy; instead, it is a sign that policy is proceeding in line with our expectations. We still expect, as our statement says, "further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate," and this expectation is reflected in the projections that I just discussed. Thanks very much. I'm happy to take your questions.





2018.12.19
Transcript of Chairman Powell's Press Conference December 19, 2018 CHAIRMAN POWELL. Good afternoon, everyone. Thanks very much for being here today. [Cough] Pardon me. Over the past year the economy has been growing at a strong pace, the unemployment rate has been near record lows, and inflation has been low and stable. All of those things remain true today. Since the September meeting of the FOMC, however, some crosscurrents have emerged. I'll explain how my colleagues and I are incorporating those crosscurrents into our judgments about the outlook and the appropriate course of policy. Since September, the U.S. economy has continued to perform well, roughly in line with our expectations. The economy has been adding jobs at a pace that will continue bringing the unemployment rate down over time. Wages have moved up for workers across a wide range of occupations-a welcome development. Inflation has remained low and stable and is ending the year a bit more subdued than most had expected. Although some American families and communities continue to struggle and some longer-term economic problems remain, the strong economy is benefiting many Americans. Despite this robust economic backdrop and our expectation for healthy growth, we have seen developments that may signal some softening relative to what we were expecting a few months ago. Growth in other economies around the world has moderated somewhat over the course of 2018, albeit to still-solid levels. At the same time, financial market volatility has increased over the past couple of months, and overall financial conditions have tightened-that is, they have become less supportive of growth. In our view, these developments have not fundamentally altered the outlook. Most FOMC participants have, instead, modestly lowered their growth and inflation forecasts for next year. The projections of Committee participants released today show growth continuing at healthy levels, the unemployment rate falling a bit further next year, and inflation remaining near 2 percent. The projections also show a modestly lower path for the federal funds rate, which should support the economy and keep us near our goals. As the economy struggled to recover from the financial crisis and the subsequent recession, the Committee held our policy rate near zero for seven years to give the economy the best chance to recover. And the economy did recover steadily, if slowly at times. Three years ago the Committee came to the view that the best way to achieve our mandate was to gradually move interest rates back to levels that are more normal in a healthy economy. Today we raised our target range for the short-term interest rates by another ¼ percentage point. As I've mentioned, most of my colleagues expect the economy to continue to perform well in the coming year. Many FOMC participants had expected that economic conditions would likely call for about three more rate increases in 2019. We have brought that down a bit and now think it is more likely that the economy will grow in a way that will call for two interest rate increases over the course of next year. We always emphasize that our policy decisions are not on a preset course and will change if the incoming data materially change the outlook. And, given recent developments, the statement notes that we "will continue to monitor global economic and financial developments and assess their implications for the economic outlook." Now I will provide some additional context and detail, starting with a review of policy over the last year. Last December, the unemployment rate was 4.1 percent, and inflation had been running just below 2 percent. FOMC participants and many other forecasters were predicting that growth in 2018 would be strong. This growth was predicted to push the unemployment rate down to near historic lows, and the increasingly tight labor market was expected to help push inflation up to 2 percent. Given this outlook, Committee members judged that the appropriate way to sustain the expansion with inflation near 2 percent was to continue gradually withdrawing the extraordinary support for the economy that had been in place for almost 10 years. Thus, in December 2017, the median of the projections of FOMC participants pointed to three ¼ point interest rate increases in 2018, which would have left the target range for the federal funds rate at year-end at 2 to 2¼ percent, still below most estimates of the longer-run normal rate. Early in 2018, it became clear that the economy was likely to be even stronger than we had expected, in part because the fiscal stimulus adopted near the start of the year was larger and more front-end loaded than most had anticipated. The signs of a more robust economy proved accurate, and the FOMC has now raised rates four times this year, counting today's action, one more time than anticipated in the median projection a year ago. This illustrates the nature of data dependence that we always emphasize. In 2018, the economy was somewhat more robust than expected, and this led to a slightly faster pace of policy normalization than had been projected. When the economy has, instead, turned out weaker than expected, the Committee has slowed or paused the pace of rate increases as we did in 2016. And when the economy has performed about as expected, the Committee has generally moved in line with the median projection as we did in 2017. What kind of year will 2019 be? We know that the economy may not be as kind to our forecasts next year as it was this year. History attests that unforeseen events as the year unfolds may buffet the economy and call for more than a slight change from the policy projections released today. With that caveat, there are two important differences in the policy outlook today versus next year. In early 2018, we saw a rising trajectory for growth; today, instead, we see growth moderating ahead. FOMC participants, along with many other forecasters, had long predicted some moderation of growth in 2019. The additional tightening of financial conditions we have seen over the past couple of months along with signs of somewhat weaker growth abroad have also led us to mark down growth and inflation projections a bit. The median of FOMC participants' projections shows growth of 3 percent this year and 2.3 percent in 2019. With growth remaining next year above its longer-run normal value, the unemployment rate is projected to fall a bit further, to 3.5 percent by the end of 2019. Inflation in the median projection remains near 2 percent. Second, the economy has continued to strengthen this year. And, given our four rate increases and the ongoing reduction in our portfolio, monetary policy will be providing a smaller boost to the economy in 2019. After today's action, the target range for the federal funds rate is 2¼ to 2½ percent, putting it at the lower end of the range of estimates of the longer-run normal rate provided by the Committee. Over the next year, if events play out broadly as expected, the federal funds rate will be in a range in which judgments of people both inside and outside the Fed will sometimes differ regarding whether the stance of policy is modestly accommodative, neutral, or modestly restrictive. When rates are in this range, the FOMC makes policy in light of the array of diverse views on the Committee. Moving forward, my colleagues and I will be watching the economy closely for indications that the stance of policy is appropriate to sustain the expansion with a strong labor market and inflation near 2 percent. It is worth noting that the Summary of Economic Projections is a compilation of the individual projections of all FOMC participants. We sometimes point to the median of these projections to illustrate the broad middle of views of the Committee. Each participant's projection represents appropriate policy under the baseline outlook-baseline outlook provided by that participant. We believe that the SEP provides useful information about Committee participants' thinking, but the median is not a consensus judgment and certainly does not represent a Committee plan. Actual policy will, as always, be adjusted as incoming data shed light on the state of the economy, the outlook, and the changing balance of risks. Neither the pace nor the ultimate destination of any further rate increases is predetermined. We will adjust monetary policy as best we can to keep the expansion on track, the labor market strong, and inflation near 2 percent. We know that our policy decisions affect all American families and businesses, and we'll continue to make our decisions objectively and based solely on the best information and analysis. Thank you, and I'll be happy to take your questions. 




2019.01.30
Transcript of Chairman Powell's Press Conference January 30, 2019 CHAIRMAN POWELL. Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome. I will start with a recap of our discussions, including our assessment of the outlook for the economy and the judgments we made about our interest rate policy and our balance sheet. I will cover the decisions we made today as well as our ongoing discussions of matters on which we expect to make decisions in coming meetings. My colleagues and I have one overarching goal: to sustain the economic expansion, with a strong job market and stable prices, for the benefit of the American people. The U.S. economy is in a good place, and we will continue to use our monetary policy tools to help keep it there. The jobs picture continues to be strong, with the unemployment rate near historic lows and with stronger wage gains. Inflation remains near our 2 percent goal. We continue to expect that the American economy will grow at a solid pace in 2019, although likely slower than the very strong pace of 2018. We believe that our current policy stance is appropriate at this time. Despite this positive outlook, over the past few months we have seen some crosscurrents and conflicting signals about the outlook. Growth has slowed in some major foreign economies, particularly in China and Europe. There is elevated uncertainty around several unresolved government policy issues, including Brexit, ongoing trade negotiations, and the effects from the partial government shutdown in the United States. Financial conditions tightened considerably late in 2018 and remain less supportive of growth than they were earlier in 2018. And, while most of the incoming domestic economic data have been solid, some surveys of business and consumer sentiment have moved lower, giving reason for caution. We always emphasize that our policies are data dependent. In other words, as economic conditions and the outlook evolve, we take that new information into account in setting our policies. We are now facing a somewhat contradictory picture of generally strong U.S. macroeconomic performance alongside growing evidence of crosscurrents. At such times, common-sense risk management suggests patiently awaiting greater clarity-an approach that has served policymakers well in the past. With that in mind, I'd like to spell out how the Federal Open Market Committee has been thinking about these issues. At our December meeting, we noted the solid outlook for steady growth, vigorous job creation, and price stability. We also stressed that the extent and timing of any rate increases were uncertain and would depend on incoming data and the evolving outlook. We therefore said that we would be paying close attention to global economic and financial developments and assessing their implications for the economic outlook. Today the FOMC decided that the cumulative effects of those developments over the last several months warrant a patient, wait-and-see approach regarding future policy changes. In particular, our statement today says, "In light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate." This change was not driven by a major shift in the baseline outlook for the economy. Like many forecasters, we still see "sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near . . . 2 percent" as the likeliest case. But the crosscurrents I mentioned suggest the risk of a less favorable outlook. In addition, the case for raising rates has weakened somewhat. The traditional case for rate increases is to protect the economy from risks that arise when rates are too low for too long, particularly the risk of too-high inflation. Over the past few months, that risk appears to have diminished. Inflation readings have been muted, and the recent drop in oil prices is likely to push headline inflation lower still in coming months. Further, as we noted in our postmeeting statement, while survey-based measures of inflation expectations have been stable, financial market measures of inflation compensation have moved lower. Similarly, the balance-the risk of financial imbalances appears to have receded, as a number of indicators that showed elevated levels of financial risk appetite last fall have moved closer to historical norms. In this environment, we believe we can best support the economy by being patient in evaluating the outlook before making any future adjustment to policy. Let me now turn to balance sheet normalization. Over its past three meetings, the FOMC has held in-depth discussions on the final stages of this process. Today we made some important progress in clarifying the path forward, as summarized in the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization that we released with today's FOMC statement. The Committee made the fundamental decision today to continue indefinitely using our current operating procedure for implementing monetary policy. That is, we will continue to use our administered rates to control the policy rate with an ample supply of reserves so that active management of reserves is not required. This is often called a "floor system" or an "abundant reserves system." Under the current set of operating procedures, as outlined in the implementation note released today, this means that the federal funds rate, our active policy tool, is held within its target range by appropriately setting the Federal Reserve's administered rates of interest on reserves, as well as the offer rate on the overnight reverse repo facility, without managing the supply of reserves actively. As the minutes of our recent discussions have indicated, the FOMC strongly believes that this approach provides good control of short-term money market rates in a variety of market conditions and effective transmission of those rates to broader financial conditions. Settling this central question clears the way for the FOMC to address a number of further questions regarding the remaining stages of balance sheet normalization. The decision to retain our current operating procedure means that, after allowing for currency in circulation, the ultimate size of our balance sheet will be driven principally by financial institutions' demand for reserves, plus a buffer so that fluctuations in reserve demand do not require us to make frequent sizable market interventions. Estimates of the level of reserve demand are quite uncertain, but we know that this demand in the post-crisis environment is far larger than before. Higher reserve holdings are an important part of the stronger liquidity position that financial institutions must now hold. Moreover, based on surveys and market intelligence, current estimates of reserve demand are considerably higher than estimates of a year or so ago. The implication is that the normalization of the size of the portfolio will be completed sooner, and with a larger balance sheet, than in previous estimates. In light of these estimates and the substantial progress we have made in reducing reserves, the Committee is now evaluating the appropriate timing for the end of balance sheet runoff. This decision will likely be part of a plan for gradually reaching our ultimate balance sheet goals while minimizing risks to achieving our dual-mandate objectives and avoiding unnecessary market disruption. We will be finalizing these plans at coming meetings. The process of balance sheet normalization is unprecedented. Throughout this process we've attempted to lay out our plans well in advance, and we've been willing to make changes as we learn more about the process. The implementation and normalization statement released today is intended to provide some additional clarity regarding the conditions under which we might adjust our plans. The statement makes three points: First, as we've long emphasized, the federal funds rate is our active monetary policy tool. Second, as far as the particular details of normalization are concerned, we will not hesitate to make changes in light of economic and financial developments. This does not mean that we would use the balance sheet as an active tool, but occasional changes could be warranted. Third, we repeat a sentence of the normalization principles we adopted in June of 2017. While the federal funds rate would remain our active tool of policy in a wide range of scenarios, we recognize that the economy could again present conditions in which federal funds rate policy is not sufficient. In those cases, the FOMC would be prepared to use its full range of tools, including balance sheet policy. Times of economic uncertainty put a premium on the clarity and predictability of FOMC policy. We are committed to clearly explaining what we are doing and why we're doing it, both regarding the path of rates and also regarding management of the balance sheet. We believe that this transparency is how we can best contribute to macroeconomic stability. Thank you. I'll be glad to take your questions. 




2019.03.20
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference March 20, 2019 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome. I will begin with an overview of economic conditions and an explanation of the decisions the Committee made at today's meeting. My colleagues and I have one overarching goal: to sustain the economic expansion, with a strong job market and stable prices, for the benefit of the American people. The U.S. economy is in a good place, and we will continue to use our monetary policy tools to help keep it there. The jobs market is strong, showing healthier wage gains and prompting many people to join or remain in the workforce. The unemployment rate is near historic lows, and inflation remains near our 2 percent goal. We continue to expect that the American economy will grow at a solid pace in 2019, although likely slower than the very strong pace of 2018. We believe that our current policy stance is appropriate. Since last year, however, we have noted some developments at home and around the world that bear close attention. Given the overall favorable conditions in our economy, my colleagues and I will be patient in assessing what, if any, changes in the stance of policy may be needed. Let me explain in more detail how incoming data warrant our current stance and a wait and see approach to changes. With the benefit of fiscal stimulus and other tailwinds, growth in 2018 was strong-in fact, at 3.1 percent, the strongest year in more than a decade. For some time, most forecasts have called for growth to continue in 2019 at a somewhat lower but still healthy pace. For example, last September, Committee participants saw growth coming in at about 2.5 percent this year. Data arriving since September suggest that growth is slowing somewhat more than expected. Financial conditions tightened considerably over the fourth quarter. While conditions have eased since then, they remain less supportive of growth than during most of 2018. Growth has slowed in some foreign economies-notably, in Europe and China. While the U.S. economy showed little evidence of slowdown through the end of 2018, the limited data we have so far this year have been somewhat more mixed. Unusually strong payroll job growth in January was followed by little growth at all in February. Smoothing through these variations, average monthly job growth appears to have stepped down from last year's strong pace, but job gains remain well above the pace necessary to provide jobs for new labor force entrants. Many other labor market indicators continue to show strength. Weak retail sales data for December bounced back considerably in January but, on balance, seem to point to somewhat slower growth in consumer spending. Business fixed investment also appears to be growing at a slower pace than last year. Inflation has been muted, and some indicators of longer-term inflation expectations remain at the low end of their ranges in recent years. Along with these developments, unresolved policy issues, such as Brexit and the ongoing trade negotiations, pose some risks to the outlook. Much of the discussion at our meeting focused on what we should make of the varied indicators. Today's Summary of Economic Projections, the SEP, reflects the assessments of individual Committee participants. And these views are in line with a broad range of other forecasts and point to a modest slowdown, with overall conditions remaining favorable. FOMC participants sought-now see 2019 growth at roughly 2 percent, with the unemployment rate remaining below 4 percent. Core inflation, which omits the effects of volatile food and energy prices, remains close to 2 percent. Declines in oil prices since last fall are expected to push headline inflation below 2 percent for a time, but this effect is likely to be temporary. Now, I'm describing views of the most likely outcomes, but historical experience reminds us that growth and inflation this year could be stronger or weaker than what we now project. The federal funds rate is now in the broad range of estimates of neutral-the rate that tends neither to stimulate nor to restrain the economy. As I noted, my colleagues and I think that this setting is well suited to the current outlook and believe that we should be patient in assessing the need for any change in the stance of policy. "Patient" means that we see no need to rush to judgment. It may be some time before the outlook for jobs and inflation calls clearly for a change in policy. In discussing the Committee's projections, it's useful to note what those projections are, as well as what they are not. The SEP includes participants' individual projections of the most likely economic scenario, along with their views of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate in that scenario. Views about the most likely scenario form one input into our policy discussions. We also discuss other plausible scenarios, including the risk of more worrisome outcomes. These and other scenarios and many other considerations go into policy but are not reflected in projections of the most likely case. Thus, we always emphasize that the interest rate projections in the SEP are not a Committee decision. They are not a Committee plan. As Chair Yellen noted some years ago, the FOMC statement, rather than the dot plot, is the device that the Committee uses to express its opinions about the likely path of rates. Today the Committee released Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans-revised Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans. We have long said that the size of the balance sheet will be considered normalized when the balance sheet is once again at the smallest level consistent with conducting monetary policy efficiently and effectively. We have sought to make the normalization process transparent, predictable, and gradual in order to minimize disruption and risks to our dual-mandate objectives. Today's announcement is the result of discussions over the past four FOMC meetings about how best to achieve these goals. The plans have many technical details, and I'll be happy to answer questions on those details. But, for now, I'll summarize the key elements. Since October 2017, we have been allowing our asset holdings to decline by not reinvesting all of the payments we receive as securities matured or were prepaid. Today we announced that we intend to slow the runoff of our assets starting in May and to cease runoff entirely in September of this year. In September, reserve balances may still be somewhat above the level required to conduct policy efficiently and effectively. If this is so, we may hold the size of our asset holdings roughly constant for a time. During this time, ongoing gradual increases in currency and our other nonreserve liabilities would imply very gradual declines in reserve balances. When the Committee judges that reserves should not decline further, securities holdings will again begin to rise, as dictated by the growth of demand for our reserve and nonreserve liabilities. We believe that these plans will facilitate a predictable, transparent, and smooth process, and we will make additional adjustments if conditions warrant. The Committee will soon turn to a few remaining normalization topics, including the desired maturity composition of our portfolio of Treasury securities. We maintain our long-stated intention to return to a portfolio consisting mainly of Treasury securities. Thank you. And I will be glad to take your questions. 




2019.05.01
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference May 1, 2019 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, and welcome. At the FOMC meeting that concluded today, we reviewed economic and financial developments in the United States and around the world and decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged. My colleagues and I have one overarching goal: to use our monetary policy tools to sustain the economic expansion with a strong job market and stable prices for the benefit of the American people. Incoming data since our last meeting in March have been broadly in line with our expectations. Economic growth and job creation have both been a bit stronger than we anticipated, while inflation has been somewhat weaker. Overall, the economy continues on a healthy path, and the Committee believes that the current stance of policy is appropriate. The Committee also believes that solid underlying fundamentals are supporting the economy, including accommodative financial conditions, high employment and job growth, rising wages, and strong consumer and business sentiment. Job gains rebounded in March after a weak reading in February and averaged 180,000 per month in the first quarter, well above the pace needed to absorb new entrants to the labor force. Although first-quarter GDP rose more than most forecasters had expected, growth in private consumption and business fixed investment slowed. Recent data suggest that these two components will bounce back, supporting our expectation of healthy GDP growth over the rest of the year. The Committee is strongly committed to our symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. For much of this long expansion, inflation ran a bit below our 2 percent objective, alongside considerable slack in resource utilization. But last year, with the unemployment rate at or below 4 percent, inflation moved up. From March through December, core inflation-which excludes volatile food and energy components-was at or very close to 2 percent. Overall inflation fluctuated from a few tenths above 2 percent to a few tenths below over this period, with the moves mostly due to changes in energy prices. As expected, overall inflation fell at the start of this year as earlier oil price declines worked through the system. Overall inflation for the 12 months ended in March was 1.5 percent. Core inflation unexpectedly fell as well, however, and as of March stood at 1.6 percent for the previous 12 months. We suspect that some transitory factors may be at work. Thus, our baseline view remains that, with a strong job market and continued growth, inflation will return to 2 percent over time and then be roughly symmetric around our longer-term objective. At the start of the year, a number of crosscurrents presented risks to the outlook, including weak global growth, particularly in China and Europe; the possibility of a disruptive Brexit; and uncertainty around unresolved trade negotiations. While concerns remain in all of these areas, it appears that risks have moderated somewhat. Global financial conditions have eased, supported in many places around the world by an accommodative shift in monetary policy and, in some cases, fiscal policy. Recent data from China and Europe show some improvement, and the prospect of a disorderly Brexit has been pushed off for now. Further, there are reports of progress in the trade talks between the United States and China. The Committee views these developments, along with the outlook for continued growth, a strong job market, and muted inflation pressures, as consistent with continued patience in assessing further adjustments in monetary policy. Over the past several months, we have made a number of consequential decisions about our balance sheet. In January, we decided to continue implementing monetary policy using our current policy regime, which involves providing an ample supply of reserves. In March, we decided to slow the pace of balance sheet runoff, starting this month, and to cease runoff entirely in September. These plans support our longer-run dual-mandate objectives and also provide clarity about the path of our asset holdings. Today we had a preliminary discussion about the longer-run maturity composition of the portfolio. Before the financial crisis, our portfolio was weighted toward shorter-term debt of the federal government. In the wake of the crisis, the Fed bought a large amount of longer-term securities with the aim of lowering longer-term interest rates and, thus, supporting the recovery. Because of these purchases, our portfolio is now weighted toward longer-term securities. As part of normalization, we will have to decide what the maturity structure should be in the longer term. This choice raises many complex issues and has possible implications for the stance of policy. Today's preliminary discussion laid the groundwork for more complete analysis and discussion, and we plan to return to the maturity composition question toward the end of the year. There is no pressing need to resolve this matter, however, and any decisions we ultimately reach will be implemented with considerable advance notice and in a manner that allows for smooth adjustment. As we have often emphasized, adjustments to the balance sheet normalization process may well be needed as the process unfolds. Finally, we made a small technical adjustment in one of our tools for implementing monetary policy: the interest rate on excess reserves, or IOER rate. The change does not reflect any shift in the intended stance of monetary policy. We use the IOER rate to help keep the federal funds rate in our target range. As balance sheet normalization continues, we have expected that the effective federal funds rate would shift up over time relative to the IOER rate. Last year we twice lowered the IOER rate by 5 basis points relative to the top of the target range after the federal funds rate moved toward the top of the range. These actions helped keep the effective federal funds rate well within the target range. And today we made one more such change. The target range for the federal funds rate is our main indicator of the stance of policy, and it remains unchanged. Thank you very much. I will be glad to take your questions. 





2019.06.19
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference June 19, 2019 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, and welcome. My colleagues and I have one overarching goal: to sustain the economic expansion, with a strong job market and stable prices, for the benefit of the American people. At the FOMC meeting that concluded today, we maintained our policy interest rate but made some significant changes to our statement. Since the beginning of the year, we have judged that our current policy stance was broadly appropriate and that we should be patient in assessing the need for any changes. In light of increased uncertainties and muted inflation pressures, we now emphasize that the Committee will closely monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion with a strong labor market and inflation near its 2 percent objective. I'd like to step back and review how the changing economic and financial picture brings us to today's decision. So far this year, the economy has performed reasonably well, with solid fundamentals supporting continued growth and strong employment. Inflation has been running somewhat below our objective, but we have expected it to pick up, supported by solid growth and a strong job market. Along with this favorable picture, we have been mindful of some ongoing crosscurrents, including trade developments and concerns about global growth. At the time of our last FOMC meeting, which ended on May 1, there was tentative evidence that these crosscurrents were moderating. The latest data from China and Europe were encouraging, and there were reports of progress in trade negotiations with China. Our continued patient stance seemed appropriate, and the Committee saw no strong case for adjusting our policy rate. In the weeks since our last meeting, the crosscurrents have reemerged. Growth indicators from around the world have disappointed, on net, raising concerns about the strength of the global economy. Apparent progress on trade turned to greater uncertainty, and our contacts in business and agriculture report heightened concerns over trade developments. These concerns may have contributed to the drop in business confidence in some recent surveys and may be starting to show through to incoming data. Risk sentiment in financial markets has deteriorated as well. Against this backdrop, inflation remains muted. While the baseline outlook remains favorable, the question is whether these uncertainties will continue to weigh on the outlook and thus call for additional monetary policy accommodation. Many FOMC participants now see that the case for a somewhat more accommodative policy has strengthened. Let me explain the basis for this judgment, starting with the outlook for jobs and growth. Participants see unemployment remaining low this year and next. Monthly job gains in May were lower than expected, however, and, in light of recent developments, this bears watching. Still, many labor market indicators remain strong. Community, business, and labor leaders all tell us that the prospects for job seekers have seldom been better, and that this is true even for those who have traditionally struggled to find work. Wages are rising, and this is particularly so for lower-paying jobs. Committee participants' growth projections from 2019 are little revised from March, with a central tendency of 2 percent to 2.2 percent, just above their estimates of longer-run normal growth. The growth projections for the year as a whole mask some important details about the composition of growth. Annual growth will be boosted by the surprisingly strong first quarter, which had just been reported at the time of the May FOMC meeting. As I noted then, the unexpected strength was largely in net exports and inventories-components that are not generally reliable indicators of ongoing momentum. The more reliable drivers of growth in the economy are spending on consumption and business investment. While consumption was weak in the first quarter, incoming data show that it has bounced back and is now running at a solid pace. In contrast, the limited evidence available at this time suggests that growth in business fixed income has slowed in the second quarter.economy are spending on consumption and business investment. While consumption was weak in the first quarter, incoming data show that it has bounced back and is now running at a solid pace. In contrast, the limited evidence available at this time suggests that growth in business fixed income has slowed in the second quarter.economy are spending on consumption and business investment. While consumption was weak in the first quarter, incoming data show that it has bounced back and is now running at a solid pace. In contrast, the limited evidence available at this time suggests that growth in business fixed income has slowed in the second quarter. 1 Chair Powell intended to say that growth in business fixed investment slowed in the second quarter. After running close to our symmetric 2 percent objective for most of last year, inflation declined in the first quarter. Data since then show some pickup. Participants broadly see inflation moving back up toward our 2 percent objective, but at a slower pace than had been expected. The central tendency for 2019 core inflation, which omits volatile food and energy components, is between 1.7 and 1.8 percent. Setting aside short-term fluctuations, Committee participants expressed concerns about the pace of inflation's return to 2 percent. Wages are rising, as noted above, but not at a pace that would provide much upward impetus to inflation. Moreover, weaker global growth may continue to hold inflation down around the world. We are firmly committed to our symmetric 2 percent inflation objective, and we are well aware that inflation weakness that persists even in a healthy economy could precipitate a difficult-to-arrest downward drift in longer-run inflation expectations. Because there are no definitive measures of inflation expectations, we must rely on imperfect proxies. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved down since our May meeting, and some survey-based expectations measures are near the bottom of their historic ranges. Combining these factors with the risks to growth already noted, participants expressed concerns about a more sustained shortfall of inflation. Overall, our policy discussions focused on the appropriate response to the uncertain environment. The projections of appropriate policy show that many participants believe that some cut in the federal funds rate will be appropriate in the scenario that they see as most likely. Though some participants wrote down policy cuts and others did not, our deliberations made clear that a number of those who wrote down a flat rate path agree that the case for additional accommodation has strengthened since our May meeting. This added accommodation would support economic activity and inflation's return to our objective. Uncertainties surrounding the baseline outlook have clearly risen since our last meeting. It is important, however, that monetary policy not overreact to any individual data point or short-term swing in sentiment. Doing so would risk adding even more uncertainty to the outlook. Thus, my colleagues and I will be looking to see whether these uncertainties will continue to weigh on the outlook, and we will use our tools as appropriate to sustain the expansion. Thank you. I will be pleased to take your questions. 





2019.07.31
JEANNA SMIALEK. Hi, Chair Powell. Jeanna Smialek with the New York Times. Per your statement here, I guess the question is, is there any reason to believe that a 25 basis point cut is going to be sufficient to expediently return inflation to your 2 percent target? And, if not, what are you going to be looking at to convince you that you need to cut rates again? What is the hurdle rate there? CHAIR POWELL. So I think you have to look at not just the 25 basis point cut, but look at the Committee's actions over the course of the year. As I noted in my opening statement, we started off expecting some rate increases, we moved to a patient setting for a few months, and now we've moved here. I think what you've seen over the course of the year is, as we've moved to a more accommodative policy, the economy has actually performed just about as expected with that gradually increasing support. And I think-I wouldn't take credit for all of that, but I do think that increasing policy support has kept the economy on track and kept the outlook favorable. In terms of the rest of your question, the Committee is really thinking of this as a way of adjusting policy to a somewhat more accommodative stance to further the three objectives that I mentioned: to insure against downside risks, to provide support to the economy, that those factors are-where factors are pushing down on economic growth, and then to support inflation. So we do think it will serve all of those goals, but again, we're thinking of it as essentially in the nature of a midcycle adjustment to policy. MICHAEL MCKEE. Michael McKee from Bloomberg Television and Radio. There's a perception out there that perhaps, in this case, the Fed is something of a hammer in search of a nail, because the latest consumer spending reports, as you suggested, don't seem to show any kind of demand problem in the U.S. And when you look at mortgage rates, auto lending rates, they've all come down. And so, wondering exactly what problem lower capital costs will solve. CHAIR POWELL. So, you're absolutely right. The-the performance of the economy has been reasonably good. The position of the economy is as close to our objectives as it's been in a long time, and the outlook is also good. What we've been monitoring since the beginning of the year is, effectively, downside risks to that outlook from weakening global growth, and we see that everywhere: weak manufacturing, weak global growth now, particularly in the European Union and China. In addition, we see trade policy developments, which at times have been disruptive and then have been less so, and also inflation running below target. So we see those as threats to what is clearly a favorable outlook, and we see this action as designed to support them and keep that outlook favorable. And, frankly, it is a continuation of what we've been doing all year to provide more support against those very same risks. MICHAEL MCKEE. But the follow-up question is, how does it do that? How does cutting interest rates lower-or, how does cutting interest rates keep that going, since the cost of capital doesn't seem to be the issue here? CHAIR POWELL. You know, I-I really think it does, and I think the evidence of my eyes tells me that our policy does support-it supports confidence, it supports economic activity, household and business confidence, and through channels that we understand. So it will lower borrowing costs. It will-and it will work. And I think you see it. Since-you know, since we noted our vigilance about the situation in June, you saw financial conditions move up, and you saw-I won't take credit for the whole recovery, but you saw financial conditions move up. You see confidence, which had troughed in June-you saw it move back up. You see economic activity on a healthy basis. It just-it seems to work through confidence channels as well as the mechanical channels that you are talking about. HEATHER LONG. Hi, Heather Long from the Washington Post. You always say that the Fed is data dependent, and much of the data that we've seen since the June meeting has surprised to the upside or at least been in line with expectations. Can you give us a sense of how that better-than-expected data impacted the FOMC's thinking? And if we keep seeing these upside surprises, does that change or evolve any FOMC thinking going forward? CHAIR POWELL. So, yes. I mean, I think we-of course, you know, what we do at every meeting, as I noted, is, we do a deep dive into U.S. economic activity and global activity and, certainly, carefully went through U.S. economic activity, which there has been some positive and some negative, but, overall, the U.S. economy has shown resilience during the intermeeting period. But, again, the-the issue is more the downside risks and then the shortfall in inflation, and we're trying to address those. So, in addition, going forward, I would say, we're going to be monitoring those same things. We'll be monitoring the evolution of trade uncertainty, of global growth, and of low inflation. And we'll also, of course, be watching the performance of the U.S. economy. As I mentioned, it had shown some resilience here to those issues, and we'll be putting all of that together, and that's how we'll be thinking about policy going forward. STEVE LIESMAN. Steve Liesman, CNBC. I just want to follow up on that. Would you say we're sort of-you guys have gotten into a new regime here? This is sort of an insurance cut and not a data-dependent cut? And are we now more in the realm of watching headlines of trade talks than we are watching unemployment rate and inflation numbers, or-and growth numbers? What-how do we know what you're going to do next, and why now in this new regime? CHAIR POWELL. Yes. So I gave three reasons for what we did, and that is to insure against downside risks to the outlook from weak global growth and trade tensions. So that is-in a sense, that is a risk-management point, and that is a bit of insurance. But we also feel like weak global growth and trade tensions are having an effect on the U.S. economy. You see it now in the second quarter: You see weak investment, you see weak manufacturing-so support demand there and also to support return of inflation to 2 percent. But there's definitely an insurance aspect of it. Trade is unusual. We don't-you know, the thing is, there isn't a lot of experience in responding to global trade tensions. So it is a-it's something that we haven't faced before and that we're learning by doing. And it is not-it's not exactly the same as watching global growth, where you see growth weakening, you see central banks and governments responding with fiscal policy, and you see growth strengthening, and you see a business cycle. With trade tensions-which do seem to be having a significant effect on financial market conditions and on the economy-they evolve in a different way, and we have to follow them. And, by the way, I want to be clear here. We play no role whatsoever in assessing or evaluating trade policies other than as-as trade policy uncertainty has an effect on the U.S. economy in the short and medium term. We're not in any way criticizing trade policy. That's really not our job. NICK TIMIRAOS. Thank you. Nick Timiraos of the Wall Street Journal. So, Chair Powell, you and your colleagues have offered three reasons to cut rates: a lower neutral rate that may have made policy a little bit tighter than anticipated, the global slowdown and the darker risk picture from the trade tensions, and this desire to re-center inflation and inflation expectations. I wonder, which of those factors, if any, weighs most heavily on you? And, more importantly, is a ¼ point cut really going to address all of that, let alone any one of those? CHAIR POWELL. So I actually think different people have different-different weightings has been my experience on those things. You mentioned lower r*, trade slowdown-and I would actually add, lower natural rate of unemployment too has moved down, all of which kind of point to more accommodation. So, again, I don't think asking about a ¼ point is really the right question. I think you have to look back over the course of the year and see the Committee moving away from rate increases to a neutral posture to, now, a rate cut. So I think we've been providing-and that affects the forward rate path, and it affects financial conditions, and financial conditions affect the economy. You see an economy which is actually performing pretty well. Growth in the first half of this year is about the same as it was in all of '18 and actually a little better than our forecast for growth in 2019-at the end of 2019. So I think, in a way, that's monetary policy working. And, again, I wouldn't just look at the 25 basis point cut as the right question. NICK TIMIRAOS. If I could follow up, I guess in May-in May it seemed as if you were setting a higher bar to cut rates: There would need to be a deterioration in the outlook. In June, you seemed to suggest that if the outlook didn't improve, there might be a rate cut. Where is that bar right now, because I think there's some confusion about how the Committee is responding. CHAIR POWELL. Yes. So we, as we noted-we noted at the bottom of the statement that language, which really says how we're thinking about it. So it says, as we're contemplating the future path of the target range for the federal funds rate, we'll continue to monitor the implications of incoming information-and it talks about that language. So, you know, I can't-all I can tell you is, we'll be looking at weak global growth. We'll be looking very carefully to see how that's happening. And I think you see-you learn-every cycle you learn about these things. So we will see whether growth is picking up, whether it's bottoming out. We'll see that picture. We'll also see on trade. You know, we're going to be seeing-I think we've learned a lot on trade in this cycle. I think we'll continue to learn more, and on inflation we will. So, in addition, the U.S. economy itself is-the performance of the U.S. economy will enter into that. So I would love to be more precise, but with trade, it is a factor that we have to assess in kind of a new way. Those are the things that we'll be looking at, and-you know, in making our decisions going forward. EDWARD LAWRENCE. Edward Lawrence with Fox Business Network. So a rate hike last December was seen by some economists and the St. Louis Fed president, James Bullard, as a step too far. Now the Fed's waited about seven months for a rate cut. You said today you were concerned about downside risks. So could some of the weakness on the business side, with that fixed investment and the sluggish side on the business side, be because the Fed waited so long? I want to get your thoughts on that and talk about why you feel that this nudge is the right level. CHAIR POWELL. Yes. So we don't hear that from businesses. They don't come in and say, "We're not investing because, you know, the federal funds rate is too high." I haven't heard that from a business. What you hear is that demand is weak for their products. You see manufacturing being weak all over the world. Investment-business investment is weak. And I wouldn't lay all of that at the door of trade talks. I think there's a-there's a global business cycle happening with manufacturing and investment, and that's-that's been, you know, definitely a bigger factor than, certainly, we expected late last year. I think global-global growth started to slow down in the middle of last year, but that has gone on to a greater extent. And, by the way, trade policy uncertainty has also been, I think, more elevated than we anticipated. In terms of, is this the-we believe this is the right move for today, and we think it's-we think it will serve the three ends that I mentioned. And I've already gone over how we're thinking about going forward. ANN SAPHIR. Ann Saphir with Reuters. You called it "a midcycle adjustment to policy." And, I mean, what should we take this to mean, and what message do you mean to send with this move today about future rate moves? CHAIR POWELL. Well, the sense of that is-I mean, that refers back to other times when the FOMC has cut rates in the middle of a cycle. And I'm contrasting it there with the beginning-for example, the beginning of a lengthy cutting cycle. ANN SAPHIR. So we're not at the beginning of a lengthy cutting cycle? CHAIR POWELL. That is not-that's not what we're seeing now. That's not our perspective now or outlook. JAMES POLITI. Hi there. Are there any circumstances under which you would decide to pause-pause at one interest rate cut, today's interest rate cut, and not-not, not go ahead with further monetary easing at this stage? Or are you predicting that, you know, once you've embarked on this easing, you will have to at least move by one more notch going forward? CHAIR POWELL. You know, so our policy is-will depend on the implications of incoming data for the economic outlook as well as evolving risks to that outlook. And so we're going to be monitoring the implications of incoming information for the outlook, as I mentioned. And, so I-that's really where I would leave you with that. VICTORIA GUIDA. Hi. Victoria Guida with Politico. On capital, Vice Chairman Quarles has said that the level of capital requirements that exists right now are such that it's basically like the countercyclical capital buffer is already turned on, and that he would like the ability to be able to turn it down in a downturn. I was wondering if you agreed with that. And then, also, just quickly, on real-time payments-larger banks have suggested that if the Fed built its own system, that would be a bait-and-switch, because the Fed asked-or called for a private-sector system. Do you think that that is a fair assessment? CHAIR POWELL. Okay. So, on the first, I would say that I view the level of capital requirements and the level of capital in the system as being about right. I do agree with that. The idea that you're talking about is one that's-that Vice Chair Quarles has talked about. It's a-it's one under consideration. The idea being, in a sense, we've chosen, in the United States, to have high through-the-cycle capital requirements by doubling the SIFI surcharge, which is the surcharge that the largest banks have in their capital requirements. We've, in effect, already put in place substantial countercyclical buffers. And so, conceptually, you can think of-I'm not saying it's the same thing as a countercyclical capital buffer. So that's-that's really the point-is that we don't rely-our system doesn't rely on our ability-it doesn't mainly rely on our ability to identify the right time in the cycle to trigger a countercyclical tool. We rely on through-the-cycle, always-on high capital and liquidity requirements. And I think that's a good thing to do. The idea of putting it in place so you can cut it, that's something some other jurisdictions have done, and it's worth considering. I think the United Kingdom, in particular, has a countercyclical capital buffer that's always on, but the one point of it is that you can cut when there's a downturn and therefore give the banks more room. So this isn't something we've decided to do. It's just under consideration. In terms of the real-time payment system, your second question, so this is something we-the United States is far behind other countries in terms of having real-time payments available to the general public. The Fed, really, coming out of the Reserve System-the Reserve Banks and the Board together-convened all of the stakeholders around the table to talk about how we can move forward. This is consumer groups, technology companies, banks, card companies-pretty much all of the groups who would be interested-and worked on a project for several years. And one of the things that came out of that was a recommendation that the Fed should build a 24 x 7 x 365 real-time settlement system to solve that problem-to address that problem. We put out a proposal in October of last year about, you know, should we do this, and we got quite a lot of comments. They were overwhelmingly favorable. And I would point out that in our payment system, in many places, the Fed operates alongside private-sector operators-for example, in wholesale payments, in ACH, and in check-so it wouldn't be unusual or out of keeping with-with how we've done things in the past. We have not made a decision on this, but it's something we're looking at carefully and something I do expect we'll make a decision on soon. CRAIG TORRES. Craig Torres from Bloomberg. I'm trying to parse what you're saying here. On the one hand, you say the policy tilt in the statement has eased financial conditions, and that's helping the economy. In that tilt, market participants are interpreting this language, "will act as appropriate," as still being in the statement. And, on the other hand, you say it's not the start of a-of an easing cycle. So what are you saying? Does that mean, you know, with one or two more cuts you'll be done, and this policy bias comes out of the statement? Or simply that this policy bias will come out of the statement sooner than market participants think? CHAIR POWELL. So it is-as I mentioned, it's going to depend on the evolving data and the evolving risk picture. But as we look at the situation now and the outlook now, what we see is that it's appropriate to make an adjustment in policy to a somewhat more accommodative stance. That's what we're seeing. And that's what we're going to be looking-you know, we'll be looking at incoming data, at all of the-at the risks that I mentioned, and the performance of the U.S. economy, and at low inflation. We'll be looking at that to make our decisions going forward. SCOTT HORSLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Scott Horsley for NPR. You've talked a number of times about the people who feel like they are just recently getting to the punchbowl 10 years into this expansion. Can you elaborate a little bit on how this rate cut is expected to help them? CHAIR POWELL. Well, I think the best thing for people who are-who are feeling that-and we are getting lots of feedback from people who work and live in low- and moderate-income communities to the effect that they're now feeling the recovery, and, in fact, they haven't felt a better labor market in anybody's memory, so this is great to hear. And I guess my view is, the best thing we can do for those people is to sustain the expansion, keep it going, and that's one of the overarching goals of-of this move and all of our policy moves. There really is no reason why the expansion can't keep going. Inflation is not troublingly high. If you look at the-at the U.S. economy right now, there's no sector that's booming and therefore might bust. You have a fairly well-balanced, in a sense, economy. Now, the engine, though, is really a consumer economy, which is 70 percent of the economy. The manufacturing economy-the investment and manufacturing part of the economy-is more or less not-not growing much. It's at a healthy level but not growing much. So-and we hope to help that with this rate cut. But, I would say, overall, we're trying to sustain the expansion and keep, you know, close to our statutory goals, which are maximum employment and stable prices. DONNA BORAK. Chairman Powell, Donna Borak with CNN. The President has repeatedly called for this rate hike and for the Fed to end the runoff of its balance sheet. What do you say to those that say that the Fed gave into what the President wanted today? And could you also elaborate a little bit further on why the Fed decided to speed up its balance sheet runoff two months earlier today? CHAIR POWELL. So I gave my-my reasons for-our reasons, really-for doing this. And, you know, just to touch on that again, this action is designed to insure against downside risks to the outlook from weak global growth and trade tensions, offset the negative effect that those factors are already having, and promote a faster return of inflation to 2 percent. That's what we've been talking about all year long, and we've gradually moved our policy in the direction of more accommodation. I think what you see is an economy that has reacted well to that. So that's what we're doing, and that's why we're doing it. We never take into account political considerations. There's no place in our discussions for that. We also don't conduct monetary policy in order to prove our independence. We conduct monetary policy in order to-to move as close as possible to our statutory goals, and that's what we're always going to do. We're always going to use our tools that way. And then, at the end, we'll-you know, we'll live with the results. In terms of the balance sheet, that was really just a matter of simplicity and consistency. Really nothing more to it than that. GREG ROBB. Thank you, Chairman Powell. Greg Robb from MarketWatch. I was wondering-we weren't in the room, but I think it's a fair assumption to know that the two dissenters probably spoke about financial stability concerns. So I was wondering if you could talk about what you-what was your response to them when those concerns were raised? I've collected a couple of things from the IMF, and the Bank of International Settlements said that it's just-when you have low rates, you just get more debt in the economy, and that there's also this feeling that it makes it harder to raise rates. So could you talk about that? Thank you. CHAIR POWELL. Yes. So, first, let me say-I'll just speak for myself, but I understand those concerns very well. I do. I've-you know, I've studied them, I've spoken about them, and I take them very seriously. But as I look at today's situation, I don't see them as a reason not to take this action today. I just don't think-that would be my point. And one of the reasons why I think that is, if you look-if you look-so we have a financial stability framework now for the first time. Before the crisis, we didn't have this, but now we have it, and we publish it. And we look at, really, four big things so that we know we can-you know, the public can hold us accountable and compare us meeting to meeting, and-you know, and see whether we got this right, because it's transparent now. But the four things we look at are valuation pressures. And we do see notable valuation pressures in some markets but, you know, honestly, not at a highly troubling level. In terms of household borrowing, household and business borrowing is the second thing. Households are in a very good shape overall. I'll come back to business borrowing. Leverage in the financial system is low, and funding risk is low. So, overall, staff's view has been-and my view has been-that if you look overall, financial stability vulnerabilities are moderate. The place that gets all the attention right now-a lot of attention-is business borrowing, and we look very carefully at that. What's happening with business borrowing is, the loans have moved off the balance sheets of the banks and into market-based vehicles, which tend to be stably funded. But, nonetheless, it's clear that the highly leveraged business sector could act as an amplifier to a downturn. So we're watching that very carefully. But, again, I think if you look overall at the U.S. financial system, what you see is a high level of resilience-much higher than it was before the crisis-and that's something to take comfort from. And I think all of that gives us the ability to use monetary policy for its purposes and rely on supervisory and regulatory tools to-you know, to keep the financial system resilient. GREG ROBB. So you're not doing something today for-to help today, and then it's going to cause problems down the road? You're not worried about that kind of dynamic? CHAIR POWELL. There are very few things that I don't worry about at all. So, of course, of course, we monitor. We have-every quarter we have an extensive briefing on financial stability, and we had that yesterday. So we look at this on an ongoing basis. We have a great team. We liaise with central banks around the world. You know, one of my colleagues is the head of the Financial Stability Board globally, so we're very, very much monitoring these things all the time. And we worry about them all the time. We're always looking at the-we're looking for that thing that we may have missed a lot of the time. But the things we haven't missed, I think they paint a mixed picture, but not one that should prevent us from taking monetary policy actions that we think are appropriate to support the economy. MARTIN CRUTSINGER. Marty Crutsinger, AP. You've talked in this press conference about being data dependent going forward, and that this is not the start of a series of rate cuts. But the financial markets seem to think that this is the start of a series of rate cuts, and they're predicting three, four cuts this year. Is this your effort to try to damp down that-that thing? CHAIR POWELL. No. Let me be clear. What I said was, it's not-it's not the beginning of a long series of rate cuts. I didn't-I didn't say it's just one or anything like that. What I said is, when you think about rate-cutting cycles, they go on for a long time, and the Committee is not seeing that-not seeing us in that place. You would do that if you saw real economic weakness and you thought that the federal funds rate needed to be cut a lot. That's not what we're seeing. That's not what we're seeing. What we're seeing is that it's appropriate to-to adjust policy to a somewhat more accommodative stance over time, and that's how we're looking at it. What I said was, it's not a long cutting cycle-in other words, referring to what we do when there's a recession or a very severe downturn. That's-that's really what I was ruling out. I think, if you look back at other midcycle adjustments, you'll see-you know, I don't know that they'll be, in the end, comparable or not, but you'll see examples of these. DON LEE. Don Lee with the L.A. Times. You mentioned the difficulty of assessing trade tensions in the economic outlook. Could you say how much of a factor the U.S.-China trade conflict was in the Fed's decision to cut rates? And if the current stalemate and the threat of more tariffs continue, what would that mean for future interest rates and possible cuts? CHAIR POWELL. So, you know, I wouldn't bring it down to any one trade thing or any one factor. I think we look at a broad range of factors, and trade uncertainty-trade policy uncertainty is one of them. That certainly includes the discussions with China, but I wouldn't-I wouldn't be able to tell you how much of it is due to that. And without knowing-you know, I think we-with trade, we have to react to the developments, and we don't know what they'll be, and so it's hard to exactly say. Certainly, we've seen, though, that when there's a sharp confrontation between two large economies, you can see effects on business confidence pretty quickly and on financial markets pretty quickly. We saw that in June. But then we saw them unwind after that, to some extent. You've seen it returning to-to a much lower temperature, I think. Again, with-with trade policy, we're just going to be watching and trying to assess the implications for the-for the U.S. outlook. DON LEE. How much of an effect could the tariffs have? CHAIR POWELL. You know, the mechanical effects of the tariffs are quite small. They're not large as it relates to the U.S. economy. The real question is, what are the effects on the economy through the-through the confidence channel-business confidence channel? And, again, very, very hard to tease that out. I've seen some research, which-you know, which says that they are meaningful-meaningful effects on-on output. That's to say, not trivial. And I think that that sounds right, but it's quite hard to get-there is no way to get an accurate measure. You have to look at a range of estimates, and I think businesses will tell you that it's a factor, particularly businesses that have-manufacturing businesses that have supply chains that cross international borders will all tell you that it's been a challenge. Many of them have made adjustments, and they've gotten to a place where it's okay, but it's-it's been a challenge. PAUL KIERNAN. Paul Kiernan from Dow Jones Newswires. Thanks for the question, Chairman. As the press conference-as this press conference has gone under way, markets have declined. The Dow is down as much as 400 points. What I'm hearing is a reluctance to provide more guidance around the future path of rates. And I'm wondering if that reflects a greater lack of consensus on the Committee. And, you know, how much consensus do you want to see around these decisions, and how split are people about this? CHAIR POWELL. You know, you're right. There's a range of views on the Committee, and-but the Committee is unified, completely unified on our dedication to making the best policy decisions that we can make. And that means people have a responsibility to do their best thinking and to present that thinking, and I wouldn't have it any other way. In terms of the way forward, we will be monitoring the factors that I mentioned, and we laid that out in the-you know, in the postmeeting statement, and that's the roadmap we're going to be following going forward. We're going to be data dependent. We're going to be, as we always are, doing what we need to do-what we believe we need to do to support the economic expansion. JOHN HELTMAN. Hi, John Heltman with American Banker. So it's been about 18 months since the Fed issued its enforcement action against Wells Fargo. And I was wondering if you could characterize the progress that the bank has made towards the shortcomings that it had in its risk-management processes. And I'm also curious whether their lack of a permanent CEO has hampered progress, in your eyes. CHAIR POWELL. So the problems at Wells Fargo-that arose at Wells Fargo around risk management and consumer-the way they dealt with the consumer were actually pretty deep, and I think the company realizes that. And they're not going to be fixed-they haven't been fixed quickly, and, frankly, we didn't expect them to be fixed quickly. So they're-you know, they-they will be under the growth cap, our enforcement action, until the Board votes to lift it, and that's not something we're considering doing right now. And the Committee-I mean, the company is working away to address these issues, but, as I said, they're deep-seated issues, and it just takes time to address them. I wouldn't comment on the CEO question. I don't really have anything for you on that. JOHN HELTMAN. I mean, I just-I'd like to clarify, like, are you pleased with the responsiveness you're getting from them? Do you feel like this is going the way that you kind of wanted it to go? CHAIR POWELL. I'm not going to characterize it. You know-I mean, I have characterized it. We have-we have an enforcement action in place. The company is working away at addressing it. They take it seriously. I think they do see it as we do, as something that has to go deep. And, you know, we'll lift the growth cap when we're satisfied. NANCY MARSHALL-GENZER. Nancy Marshall-Genzer with Marketplace. So when we have our next recession, the Fed will have less room-it will happen-the Fed will have less room to maneuver cutting interest rates since you're cutting now. How big of a problem will that be? CHAIR POWELL. You know, the premise is not-I will question your premise for a second. If you remember whether-again, one of the purposes of our-of our cut today is to support the expansion. And we don't know when-and if it really works-if that works very well and the economy gets going again, you know, you don't know where the-where the funds, in other cycles-and I don't know whether this will happen or not, but in other cycles, the Fed wound up raising rates again after a midcycle adjustment. Again, I'm not predicting that, but I don't think that we know that we won't have-that we'll have less ammo because of these things. That's one thing. So- NANCY MARSHALL-GENZER. But you won't be able to cut as much if-if rates are low. I mean, you will have-have less ammo, in that sense. CHAIR POWELL. Well, but you're assuming that we would never raise rates again, that once we've cut these rates that they can never go back up again. Just as a matter of principle, I don't think that's right. In other-in other long, long cycles, long U.S. business cycles have sometimes involved this kind of event where the Fed will stop hiking-in fact, will cut-and then will go back to hiking. Again, I don't know whether that'll happen right here. It doesn't seem-it doesn't seem like something that's in-you know, particularly likely, frankly, but we don't know that. And the other thing is, I think by extending the cycle, you-you do have a lot of benefits from that. And I think, you know, we will use the tools that we have. A couple of rate hikes one way or the other isn't going to matter so much if there is a downturn. And you're right, there will eventually be one. We'll use all of our tools aggressively, as we need to, when that time comes. JEAN YUNG. Hi, Jean Yung with MNI. Can you give us an update on the ongoing reassessment of the inflation framework? And have the discussions so far this year had any bearing on today's decision? CHAIR POWELL. So the monetary policy review is really for-it's really there to look at the way we make policy in the longer run. It's not something that enters directly into our discussions today. We've had-so far we've had a series of meetings, called Fed Listens, at almost all the Reserve Banks. Soon it will be all the Reserve Banks. And we meet there with the constituencies that we serve, and they've been very, very successful, hearing from people-not just-not just economists, but people who are not economists, how-how their lives interact with the Fed's work. It's been-it's been great. I've got to say, it's been even better than I hoped it would be. We're just now beginning the process of incorporating all of that feedback, and we're going to be having a series of meetings, beginning today and yesterday, as we evaluate, you know, the questions that we're asking about our framework. So it's very early to say where that's going, but, you know, we're setting the table now and looking at what our framework is and looking at how it's performed, looking at how all frameworks performed around the world during the Global Financial Crisis. I expect we'll be at this a while. I'm very excited about it. I think it's been a good exercise. I think it's opened us up to sunlight and perspectives that we might not have gotten otherwise. And I think it's a good time. You know, you have-10 years after the crisis, you're really living in a new normal for the economy and monetary policy, and it's a really good time to step back and ask whether there are some things that we can do to improve our framework. COURTENAY BROWN. Hi, Mr. Chairman. Courtenay Brown from Axios. Can you give us a sense of whether the Committee feels constrained at all by the market's expectations for more cuts or other developments in financial markets? CHAIR POWELL. So I think this was-this was well telegraphed. What we did today was-was very consistent with what we had said we were going to do. I had mentioned the reasons for it. They've been well telegraphed, and I think-you know, I think they will-they will achieve their goals. We do know that monetary policy works through communications and then actions that are consistent with those communications, and we think that the changes that we've made this year have really worked. Of course, we always retain the flexibility to adjust our communications and our actions to-in light of incoming data and the evolving risk picture, but-I'll leave it there. BRIAN CHEUNG. Hi, Brian Cheung with Yahoo Finance. Just to expand on that point about communication, I mean, we saw that markets have been particularly sensitive with regards to New York Fed President John Williams's remarks before the blackout period. So the Fed added language in the statement that says that the Committee is contemplating the future path of the target range for the federal funds rate as it monitors implications. I'm wondering-now there's kind of this inflection point about whether or not the downside risk, because you've had to cut rates, outweighs the fact that you still see a positive outlook of the U.S. economy at a baseline. So, just wondering if you can kind of clarify all those things within the context of the challenges of communicating it. CHAIR POWELL. Yeah, so again, I see the U.S. outlook as being a positive one. And we do-we have had these global, really, risks to the outlook. There really-there really is nothing in the U.S. economy that presents a-you know, a prominent near-term threat to the U.S. economy. As I mentioned, there's no-there's no segment that's really-or sector that's really boiling over and overheating. Nothing like that. It's-it's within-within the economy. It's-it's healthy, so I would say that. Downside risks are really coming from abroad. And, of course, we are concerned about-about low inflation. But-and, by the way, those risks from abroad are affecting the manufacturing sector here and business investment-fixed investment. So-thank you.





2019.09.18
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference September 18, 2019 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome. My colleagues at the Federal Reserve and I are dedicated to serving the American people. We do this by steadfastly pursuing the goals Congress has given us: maximum employment and stable prices. We are committed to making the best decisions we can based on facts and objective analysis. Today we decided to lower interest rates. As I will explain shortly, we took this step to help keep the U.S. economy strong in the face of some notable developments and to provide insurance against ongoing risks. The U.S. economy has continued to perform well. We are into the 11th year of this economic expansion, and the baseline outlook remains favorable. The economy grew at a 2½ percent pace in the first half of the year. Household spending-supported by a strong job market, rising incomes, and solid consumer confidence-has been the key driver of growth. In contrast, business investment and exports have weakened amid falling manufacturing output. The main reasons appear to be slower growth abroad and trade policy developments-two sources of uncertainty that we've been monitoring all year. Since the middle of last year, the global growth outlook has weakened, notably in Europe and China. Additionally, a number of geopolitical risks, including Brexit, remain unresolved. Trade policy tensions have waxed and waned, and elevated uncertainty is weighing on U.S. investment and exports. Our business contacts around the country have been telling us that uncertainty about trade policy has discouraged them from investing in their businesses. Business fixed investment posted a modest decline in the second quarter, and recent indicators point to continued softness. Even so, with household spending remaining on a solid footing and with supportive financial conditions, we expect the economy to continue to expand at a moderate rate. As seen from FOMC participants' most recent projections, the median expectation for real GDP growth remains near 2 percent this year and next before edging down toward its estimated longer-run value. The job market remains strong. The unemployment rate has been near half-century lows for a year and a half, and job gains have remained solid in recent months. The pace of job gains has eased this year, but we had expected some slowing after last year's strong pace. Participation in the labor force by people in their prime working years has been increasing. And wages have been rising, particularly for lower-paying jobs. People who live and work in low- and middle-income communities tell us that many who have struggled to find work are now getting opportunities to add new and better chapters to their lives. This underscores, for us, the importance of sustaining the expansion so that the strong job market reaches more of those left behind. We expect the job market to remain strong. The median of participants' projections for the unemployment rate remains below 4 percent over the next several years. Inflation continues to run below our symmetric 2 percent objective. Over the 12 months through July, total PCE inflation was 1.4 percent and core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, was 1.6 percent. We still expect inflation to rise to 2 percent; the median projection is 1.9 percent this year and 2 percent in 2021. However, inflation pressures clearly remain muted, and indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are at the lower end of their historical ranges. We are mindful that continued below-target inflation could lead to an unwelcome downward slide in longer-term inflation expectations. Overall, as we say in our postmeeting statement, we continue to see sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective as most likely. While this has been our outlook for quite some time, our views about the path of interest rates that will best achieve these outcomes have changed significantly over the past year. As I mentioned, weakness in global growth and trade policy uncertainty have weighed on the economy and pose ongoing risks. These factors, in conjunction with muted inflation pressures, have led us to shift our views about appropriate monetary policy over time toward a lower path for the federal funds rate, and this shift has supported the outlook. Of course, this is the role of monetary policy-to adjust interest rates to maintain a strong labor market and keep inflation near our 2 percent objective. Today's decision to lower the federal funds rate target by ¼ percent, to 1.75 percent to 2 percent, is appropriate in light of the global developments I mentioned as well as muted inflation pressures. Since our last meeting, we have seen additional signs of weakness abroad and a resurgence of trade policy tensions, including the imposition of additional tariffs. The Fed has no role in the formulation of trade policy, but we do take into account anything that could materially affect the economy relative to our employment and inflation goals. The future course of monetary policy will depend on how the economy evolves and what developments imply for the economic outlook and risks to the outlook. We have often said that policy is not on a preset course, and that is certainly the case today. As I have noted, the baseline economic outlook remains positive. The projections of appropriate policy show that participants generally anticipate only modest changes in the federal funds rate over the next couple of years. Of course, those views are merely forecasts and, as always, will evolve with the arrival of new information. Let me say a few words about our monetary policy operations. Funding pressures in money markets were elevated this week, and the effective federal funds rate rose above the top of its target range yesterday. While these issues are important for market functioning and market participants, they have no implications for the economy or the stance of monetary policy. This upward pressure emerged as funds flowed from the private sector to the Treasury to meet corporate tax payments and settle purchases of Treasury securities. To counter these pressures, we conducted overnight repurchase operations yesterday and again today. These temporary operations were effective in relieving funding pressures, and we expect the federal funds rate to move back into the target range. In addition, as we have done in the past, we made a technical adjustment to the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances, setting it 20 basis points below the top of the target range for the federal funds rate. In a related action, we also adjusted the rate on the overnight repurchase facility to 5 basis points below the bottom of the target range. We will continue to monitor market developments and will conduct operations as necessary to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates within the target range. Consistent with our decision earlier this year to continue to implement monetary policy in an ample-reserves regime, we will, over time, provide a sufficient supply of reserves so that frequent operations are not required. To summarize, we are fully committed to pursuing our goals of maximum employment and stable prices. As the Committee contemplates the future path of the target range for the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective. Thanks. I'll be happy to take your questions.





2019.10.30
CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, and welcome. My colleagues at the Federal Reserve and I are dedicated to serving the American people. We do this by steadfastly pursuing the goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and stable prices. We're committed to making the best decisions we can based on facts and objective analysis. Today we decided to lower the interest rates for the third time this year. We took this step to help keep the U.S. economy strong in the face of global developments and to provide some insurance against ongoing risks. As I will explain shortly, the policy adjustments we have made since last year are providing-and will continue to provide-meaningful support to the economy. We believe that monetary policy is in a good place. The U.S. economy is in its 11th year of expansion, and the baseline outlook remains favorable. The overall economy is growing at a moderate rate. Household spending continues to be strong, supported by a healthy job market, rising incomes, and solid consumer confidence. In contrast, business investment and exports remain weak, and manufacturing output has declined over the past year. Sluggish growth abroad and trade developments have been weighing on those sectors. Looking ahead, we continue to expect the economy to expand at a moderate rate, reflecting solid household spending and supportive financial conditions. The job market remains strong. The unemployment rate has been near half-century lows for a year and a half. The pace of job gains has eased this year but has remained solid; we had expected some slowing after last year's strong pace. Participation in the labor force by people in their prime working years has been increasing, and wages have been rising, particularly for lower-paying jobs. People who live and work in low- and middle-income communities tell us that many who have struggled to find work are now getting opportunities to add new and better chapters to their lives. This underscores for us the importance of sustaining the expansion so that the strong job market reaches more of those left behind. Inflation continues to run below our symmetric 2 percent objective. Over the 12 months through August, total PCE inflation was 1.4 percent and core inflation was 1.8 percent. Inflation pressures remain muted, and indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are at the lower end of their historic ranges. We're mindful that continued below-target inflation could lead to an unwelcome downward slide in long-term inflation expectations. However, against the backdrop of a strong economy and supportive monetary policy, we expect inflation will rise to 2 percent. Overall, we continue to see sustained expansion of economic activity, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective as most likely. While this has been our outlook for quite some time, our views about the path of interest rates that will best achieve these outcomes have changed significantly over the past year. As I mentioned, weakness in global growth and trade developments have weighed on the economy and pose ongoing risks. These factors, in conjunction with muted inflation pressures, have led us to lower our assessment of the appropriate level of the federal funds rate over the past year. In both July and September, we reduced the target rate [range] for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, and we did so again today, bringing the range to 1½ to 1 percent. The policy adjustments we've made to date will continue to provide significant support for the economy. Since monetary policy operates with a lag, the full effects of these adjustments on economic growth, the job market, and inflation will be realized over time. We see the current stance of monetary policy as likely to remain appropriate as long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with our outlook of moderate economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective. We believe monetary policy is in a good place to achieve these outcomes. Looking ahead, we'll be monitoring the effects of our policy actions, along with other information bearing on the outlook, as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the fed funds rate. Of course, if developments emerge that cause a material reassessment of our outlook, we would respond accordingly. Policy is not on a preset course. Let me end with a few words about our technical monetary policy operations. In January, we made the key decision to continue to implement monetary policy in an ample-reserves regime. In that operating framework, we control the federal funds rate primarily by setting our administered rates, not through frequent interventions to actively manage the supply of reserves. In the transition to the efficient and effective level of reserves in this regime, we slowed the gradual decline in our balance sheet in March and we stopped it in July. In response to the funding pressures in money markets that emerged in mid-September, we concluded that it would be appropriate to maintain, over a time-over time, a level of reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September of this year. To achieve this ample level, we announced on October 11 that we would purchase Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of next year as well as continue temporary open market operations at least through January. These actions are purely technical measures to support the effective implementation of monetary policy as we continue to learn about the appropriate level of reserves. They do not represent a change in the stance of monetary policy. In particular, our Treasury bill purchases should not be confused with the large-scale asset purchase programs that we deployed after the financial crisis. In those programs, we purchased longer-term securities to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and ease broader financial conditions. In contrast, increasing the supply of reserves by purchasing Treasury bills only alters the mix of short-term assets held by the public and should not materially affect demand and supply for longer-term securities or financial conditions more broadly. Thank you. I will be happy to take your questions. 





2019.12.11
CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, everyone. To begin, I'd like to say a few words about Paul Volcker, who, as you know, passed away earlier this week. Paul Volcker served as Federal Reserve Chair from 1979 to 1987. He accomplished many things during his long and distinguished career at the Fed and elsewhere. Of course, he's best known for leading the fight to tame the double-digit inflation that he inherited as Chair, thus laying the foundation for the prosperity and price stability we enjoy today. But what is perhaps most admirable about him-more than his many accomplishments-was his character. He believed that there is no higher calling than public service, and he dedicated the lion's share of his life to it. With courage, integrity, and tenacity, he always pursued the policies that he believed would ultimately benefit all Americans. My colleagues and I continue to draw inspiration from his example. Turning to today's meeting, my colleagues and I decided to leave our policy rate unchanged after lowering it a total of percentage point at the previous three meetings. As always, we base our decisions on judgment of how best to achieve the goals Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Our economic outlook remains a favorable one despite global developments and ongoing risks. With our decisions through the course of the past year, we believe that monetary policy is well positioned to serve the American people by supporting continued economic growth, a strong job market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent goal. The economic expansion is in its 11th year, the longest on record. Household spending has been strong, supported by a healthy job market, rising incomes, and solid consumer confidence. In contrast, business investment and exports remain weak, and manufacturing output has declined over the past year. As has been the case for some time, sluggish growth abroad and trade developments have been weighing on those sectors. Even so, the overall economy has been growing moderately. And with a strong household sector and supportive monetary and financial conditions, we expect moderate growth to continue. As seen from FOMC participants' most recent projections, the median expectation for real GDP growth slows slightly over the next few years but remains near 2 percent. The unemployment rate has been near half-century lows for well more than a year, and the pace of job gains remains solid. Participation in the labor force by people in their prime working years, ages 25 through 54, has been increasing. And wages have been rising, particularly for lower-paying jobs. People who live and work in low- and middle-income communities tell us that many who have struggled to find work are now finding new opportunities. Employment gains have been broad based across all racial and ethnic groups and all levels of education. These developments underscore for us the importance of sustaining the expansion so that the strong job market reaches more of those left behind. We expect the job market to remain strong. The median of participants' projections for the unemployment rate remains below 4 percent over the next several years. Inflation continues to run below our symmetric 2 percent objective. Over the 12 months through October, total PCE inflation was 1.3 percent, and core inflation-which excludes volatile food and energy prices and is a better indicator of future inflation-was 1.6 percent. While low and stable inflation is certainly a good thing, inflation that runs persistently below our objective can lead to an unhealthy dynamic in which longer-term inflation expectations drift down, pulling actual inflation even lower. In turn, interest rates would be lower as well and closer to their effective lower bound. As a result, the scope for interest rate reductions to support the economy in a future downturn would be diminished, resulting in worse economic outcomes for American families and businesses. Against the backdrop of a strong economy and supportive monetary policy, we expect inflation will rise to 2 percent. The median of participants' projection rises to 1.9 percent next year and 2 percent in 2021. We're strongly committed to achieving our symmetric 2 percent inflation goal. Over the course of the past year, our views about the path of interest rates that would best achieve our employment and inflation objectives changed significantly, as the economy faced some important challenges from weaker global growth and trade developments. As the year progressed, we adjusted the stance of monetary policy to cushion the economy from these developments and to provide some insurance against the associated risks. In addition, inflation pressures were unexpectedly muted, strengthening the case for a more supportive stance of policy. Rather than modestly increasing the target rate for the federal funds rate this year, as seemed appropriate a year ago, we reduced it by percentage point. This shift has helped support the economy and has kept the outlook on track. The medians of participants' projections for economic growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation are little changed from a year ago, aside from a lower inflation projection for 2019. Of course, that is the function of monetary policy-to adjust interest rates to promote employment and price stability in response to forces acting on the economy. We believe that the current stance of monetary policy will support sustained growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective. As long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with this outlook, the current stance of monetary policy likely will remain appropriate. Looking ahead, we will be monitoring the effects of our recent policy actions, along with other information bearing on the outlook, as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. Of course, if developments emerge that cause a material reassessment of our outlook, we would respond accordingly. Policy is not on a preset course. Finally, I wanted to note that we've been purchasing Treasury bills and conducting repurchase operations, consistent with the plan we announced in December. These technical operations are aimed at maintaining an ample level of reserves and addressing money market pressures that could adversely affect the implementation of monetary policy. Our operations have gone well so far; pressures in money markets over recent weeks have been subdued. To address possible pressures in money markets over the year-end, we've been conducting term repo operations spanning year-end. We stand ready to adjust the details of our operations as appropriate to keep the federal funds rate in the target range. Thank you, and I'll be happy to take your questions. 





2020.01.29
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference January 29, 2020 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, everyone. Thanks for being here. At today's meeting, my colleagues and I decided to leave our policy rate unchanged. As always, we base our decisions on our judgment of how best to achieve the goals Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. We believe monetary policy is well positioned to serve the American people by supporting continued economic growth, a strong job market, and a return of inflation to our symmetric 2 percent goal. The expansion is in its 11th year, the longest on record. Growth in household spending moderated toward the end of last year, but with a healthy job market, rising incomes, and upbeat consumer confidence, the fundamentals supporting household spending are solid. In contrast, business investment and exports remain weak, and manufacturing output has declined over the past year. Sluggish growth abroad and trade developments have been weighing on activity in these sectors. However, some of the uncertainties around trade have diminished recently, and there are some signs that global growth may be stabilizing after declining since mid-2018. Nonetheless, uncertainties about the outlook remain, including those posed by the new coronavirus. Overall, with monetary and financial conditions supportive, we expect moderate economic growth to continue. The unemployment rate has been near half-century lows for well more than a year, and the pace of job gains remains solid. Participation in the labor force by people in their prime working years, ages 25 to 54, is at its highest level in more than a decade. And wages have been rising, particularly for lower-paying jobs. People who live and work in middle-income communities and low-income communities tell us that many who have struggled to find work are now finding new opportunities. Employment gains have been broad based across all racial and ethnic groups and all levels of education. These developments underscore for us the importance of sustaining the expansion so that the strong job market reaches more of those left behind. Inflation continues to run below our symmetric 2 percent objective. Over the 12 months through November, total PCE inflation was 1.5 percent, and core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, was 1.6 percent. Available data suggest similar inflation readings for December, though we expect inflation to move closer to 2 percent over the next few months as unusually low readings from early 2019 drop out of the calculation. While low and stable inflation is certainly a good thing, inflation that runs persistently below our objective can lead longer-term inflation expectations to drift down, pulling actual inflation even lower. In turn, interest rates would be lower as well-closer to their effective lower bound. As a result, we would have less room to reduce interest rates to support the economy in a future downturn to the detriment of American families and businesses. We have seen this dynamic play out in other economies around the world, and we are determined to avoid it here in the United States. In particular, we believe the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate to support sustained economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation returning to our 2 percent-symmetric 2 percent objective. As long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with this outlook, the current stance of monetary policy likely will remain appropriate. We will be monitoring the effects of the policy actions we took last year, along with other information bearing on the outlook, as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. Of course, if developments emerge that cause a material reassessment of our outlook, we would respond accordingly. Policy is not on a preset course. I will conclude with a brief overview of our current plans for our technical operations to implement monetary policy. The plan the FOMC announced back in October to purchase Treasury bills and conduct repo operations has proceeded smoothly and has succeeded in providing an ample supply of reserves to the banking system and effectively controlling the federal funds rate. In light of the resulting stability in the federal funds rate and money market conditions more generally, we decided to make a small technical upward adjustment to administered rates to ensure that the federal funds rate trades well within the target range. This action reverses the small downward adjustment made in September when money markets were volatile. As our bill purchases continue to build reserves toward levels that maintain ample conditions, the role played by active repo operations will naturally recede. Over the first half of this year, we intend to adjust the size and pricing of repo operations as we transition away from their active use in supplying reserves. This process will take place gradually, and, as indicated in today's FOMC directive to the Desk, we expect to continue offering repos at least through April to ensure a consistently ample supply of reserves. Based on current projections, we expect that the underlying level of reserves will durably reach ample levels sometime in the second quarter of this year. As we get close to that point, we intend to slow the pace of purchases and transition to a program of smaller reserve management purchases that maintains an ample level of reserves without the active use of repos. At that point, as in the pre-crisis period, our balance sheet will be expanding gradually over time, reflecting the trend growth in the demand for currency and other Federal Reserve liabilities. All of these technical measures are designed to support the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy and are not intended to represent a chance-a change in the stance of monetary policy. We are committed to completing the transition to our longer-run ample-reserves regime smoothly and predictably. Of course, we will continue to closely monitor conditions in money markets, and we will adjust these plans as conditions warrant. Thank you, and I'll be happy to take your questions. 





2020.03.15
CHAIR POWELL. Good evening, everyone. Today the Federal Reserve took a number of actions to support American families and business and the economy overall and to promote the flow of credit as we weather disruptions caused by the coronavirus. The virus is having a profound effect on people across the United States and around the world. On behalf of my colleagues at the Federal Reserve, our first concern is for those who've been harmed. Families, businesses, schools, organizations, and governments at all levels are taking steps to protect people's health. These measures, which are essential for containing the outbreak, will nonetheless understandably take a toll on economic activity in the near term. While the primary response to this challenge will come from our health-care providers and policy experts, economic policymakers must do what we can to ease hardship caused by the disruptions to the economy and to support a swift return to normal once they have passed. The Federal Reserve's role is guided by our mandate from Congress to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. Today we reduced the target range for our policy interest rate by 1 percentage point, bringing it close to zero, and said that we expect to maintain the rate at this level until we're confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. In addition, we took other actions to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. Before describing our actions more fully, I will share how my colleagues and I currently view the economic outlook. The economy came into this challenging period on a strong footing. The unemployment rate was 3.5 percent in February and has been at or near half-century lows for almost two years. Job gains have been running at a solid pace, well above what is needed to provide jobs for new entrants into the labor market. Participation in the labor force by people in their prime working years remained near its highest rate in more than a decade. And wages have been rising, particularly for lower-paying jobs. Overall economic activity has been expanding at a moderate rate, even though weak growth abroad and trade developments have been weighing on some sectors. U.S. banks are strong, have high levels of capital and liquidity, and are well positioned to provide credit to households and businesses. Against this favorable backdrop, the virus presents significant economic challenges. Like others, we expect that the illness and the measures now being put in place to stem its spread will have a significant effect on economic activity in the near term. Those in travel, tourism, and hospitality industries are already seeing a sharp drop in business. In addition, the effects of the outbreak are restraining economic activity in many foreign economies, which is causing difficulties for U.S. industries that rely on global supply chains. The weakness abroad will also weigh on our exports for a time. Moreover, the energy sector has recently come under stress because of the large drop in global oil prices. Inflation, which has continued to run below our symmetric 2 percent objective, will likely be held down this year by the effects of the outbreak. Financial conditions have also tightened markedly. The cost of credit has risen for all but the strongest borrowers, and stock markets around the world are down sharply. Moreover, the rapidly evolving situation has led to high volatility in financial markets as everyone tries to assess the path ahead. In the past week, several important financial markets, including the market for U.S. Treasury securities, have at times shown signs of stress and impaired liquidity. The market for Treasury securities is a critical part of the foundation of the global financial system. It is generally the most liquid of all markets and serves as the benchmark by which many other financial assets are valued. It plays an important role in allowing households and firms to earn a safe return and manage their risks. When stresses arise in the Treasury market, they can reverberate through the entire financial system and the economy. To prevent this from happening and to support the smooth functioning of the Treasury market, we announced today that we will purchase at least $500 billion of Treasury securities over the coming months. Similar stresses have also emerged in the market for agency mortgage-backed securities, which is closely linked to the Treasury market and critically supports the ability of people to get a mortgage to buy a house or refinance an existing mortgage. To improve the functioning of this market and to ensure the effective transmission of monetary policy to borrowers in the economy, we will also purchase at least $200 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities over coming months and immediately cease the runoff of these securities in our portfolio. While the primary purpose of these securities purchases is to restore smooth market functioning so that credit can continue to flow, the purchases will also foster more accommodative financial conditions. The Federal Reserve announced a number of other actions today to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, thereby promoting our maximum employment and price stability goals. Of these, I will highlight two. First, we reduced the interest rate on discount window loans by 1½ percentage points, bringing that rate to ¼ percent. The discount window plays an important role in supporting liquidity and stability in the banking system, and we encourage banks to turn to the discount window to help meet demands for credit from households and businesses. To make the discount window more effective, we will also offer discount window loans for periods up to 90 days. Because of the importance of the U.S. dollar in the global economy, strains in markets for borrowing and lending dollars overseas can disrupt financial conditions here in the United States. To guard against such disruptions, the Federal Reserve maintains swap lines with five major central banks. When dollar funding pressures emerge abroad, those central banks can contain the pressures in their jurisdictions and prevent them from impeding the flow of credit here at home. To address potential pressures in these markets during the current period of elevated uncertainty, we made a coordinated announcement with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank to reduce the pricing on our dollar swap lines. In addition, our central bank counterparts will begin offering dollars to institutions in their jurisdictions for a term of 84 days in addition to the usual one-week operation. These long-standing arrangements carry no risk to the Federal Reserve or to the American taxpayer. I won't go into detail on the other actions we took today, but they involved eliminating reserve requirements for banks and encouraging banks to make use of intraday credit with the Federal Reserve and to use their capital and liquidity buffers as they support lending to households and businesses. The actions we have announced today will help American families and businesses and, indeed, our entire economy weather this difficult period and will foster a more vigor-more vigorous return to normal once the disruptions from the coronavirus abate. We will continue to closely monitor economic and financial developments and their implications for the economic outlook. We are prepared to use our full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households and business, to help keep the economy strong, and to promote our maximum employment and price stability goals. Finally, let me note that today's FOMC meeting today was in lieu of the meeting scheduled for next Tuesday and Wednesday. Thank you. I'll be-I'll be happy to take a few of your questions. 






2020.04.29
CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. Thanks for joining us today. I would like to begin by acknowledging the tragic loss and tremendous hardship that people are experiencing both here in the United States and around the world. The coronavirus outbreak is first and foremost a public health crisis, and the most important response is coming from those in the front lines in hospitals, emergency services, and care facilities. On behalf of the Federal Reserve, let me express our sincere gratitude to those dedicated individuals who put themselves at risk, day after day, in service to others and to our nation. The forceful measures that we as a country are taking to control the spread of the virus have brought much of the economy to an abrupt halt. Many businesses have closed, people have been asked to stay home, and basic social interactions are greatly curtailed. People are putting their lives and livelihoods on hold, at significant economic and personal cost. All of us are affected, but the burdens are falling most heavily on those least able to carry them. It is worth remembering that the measures we are taking to contain the virus represent an investment in our individual and collective health. As a society, we should do everything we can to provide relief to those who are suffering for the public good. While many standard economic statistics have yet to catch up with the reality we're experiencing, it's clear that the effects on the economy are severe. Millions of workers are losing their jobs: Next week's jobs report is expected to show that the unemployment rate, which was at 50-year lows just two months ago, has surged into double digits. Household spending has plummeted as people stay home, and measures of consumer sentiment have fallen precipitously. Hotels, airlines, restaurants, department stores, and other retailers have been particularly hard hit. Manufacturing output fell sharply in March and is likely to drop even more rapidly this month, as many factories have temporarily closed. Overall, economic activity will likely drop at an unprecedented rate in the second quarter. Inflation is also being held down, reflecting weaker demand as well as significantly lower energy prices. Both the depth and the duration of the economic downturn are extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on how quickly the virus is brought under control. The severity of the downturn will also depend on the policy actions taken at all levels of government to cushion the blow and to support the recovery when the public health crisis passes. The Federal Reserve's response is guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. We are also committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time. Last month we quickly lowered our policy interest rate to near zero. We stated then and again today that we expect to maintain interest rates at this level until we're confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Of course, lowering interest rates cannot stop the sharp drop in economic activity caused by closures and other forms of social distancing. And low rates will not effectively spur the economy if those rates do not feed through to broader financial conditions or if households and businesses are unable to get credit. The economic disruptions caused by the virus created tremendous strains in some essential financial markets and have impaired the flow of credit in the economy. Without access to credit, families can be forced to cut back on necessities and could lose their homes. Businesses can be forced to downsize or close, resulting in further losses of jobs and incomes and worsening the downturn. Preserving the flow of credit is thus essential for mitigating the damage to the economy and setting the stage for the recovery. We have been taking broad and forceful actions to these ends. To support the flow of credit to households and businesses, foster smooth market functioning, and promote effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions, we have been purchasing large amounts of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities. The markets for these securities play a critical role in the economy, and they came under great stress last month as the scale of economic disruption became clearer and as investors clamored for liquidity. Our purchases have helped market conditions improve substantially in recent weeks. In light of this improvement, we have slowed our pace of purchases. We will continue our purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities as needed. While the primary purpose of these securities purchases is to preserve smooth market functioning and effective policy transmission, the purchases will offer-will also foster more accommodative financial conditions. We are also undertaking programs to provide stability to the financial system and to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy-for households, for businesses of all sizes, and for state and local governments. These programs benefit the economy by providing financing where it is not otherwise available. In addition, by serving as a backstop to key credit markets, the programs can improve market functioning by increasing the willingness of private lenders to extend credit. Many of these programs rely on emergency lending powers that are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. We are deploying these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by the financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. We will continue to use these powers forcefully, proactively, and aggressively until we're confident that we are solidly on the road to recovery. I would stress that these are lending powers and not spending powers. The Fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. We can only make loans to solvent entities that the-with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. Many borrowers will benefit from our programs, as will the overall economy. But for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. In these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. Elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. The Cares Act and other legislation provide direct help to people, businesses, and communities. This direct support can make a critical difference not just in helping families and businesses in a time of need, but also in limiting long-lasting damage to our economy. At the Fed, we're doing all we can to help American families and businesses weather this difficult period. When the spread of the virus is under control, businesses will reopen, and people will come back to work. We will continue to use our tools to assure that the recovery, when it comes, will be as robust as possible. Thank you, and I'll be glad to take your questions. 






2020.06.10
CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, everyone, and thanks for joining us. Our country continues to face a difficult and challenging time, as the pandemic is causing tremendous hardship here in the United States and around the world. People have lost loved ones. Many millions have lost their jobs. There is great uncertainty about the future. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to using our tools to do whatever we can-and for as long as it takes-to provide some relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. The most important response to this crisis has come from our health-care workers. And on behalf of the Federal Reserve, let me express our sincere gratitude to those dedicated individuals who put themselves at risk, day after day, in service to others and to our nation. Let me also thank the many other essential workers across the country who have helped meet our basic needs for goods and services in these difficult times. The virus and the forceful measures taken to control its spread have induced a sharp decline in economic activity and a surge in job losses. Indicators of spending and production plummeted in April, and the decline in real GDP in the current quarter is likely to be the most severe on record. Even after the unexpectedly positive May employment report, nearly 20 million jobs have been lost on net since February, and the unemployment rate has risen about 10 percentage points, to 13.3 percent. As was highlighted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, this figure likely understates the extent of unemployment; accounting for the unusually large number of workers who reported themselves as employed but absent from their jobs would raise the unemployment rate by about 3 percentage points. The downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the most affected. In particular, the rise in joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers, for women, and for African Americans and Hispanics. In recent weeks, some indicators suggest a stabilization or even a modest rebound in some segments of the economy, such as retail merchandise and motor vehicle sales. Employment rose in many sectors of the economy in May, and the unemployment [rate] edged down as some workers returned to their jobs from temporary layoffs. With the easing of social-distancing restrictions across the country, people are increasingly moving about, and many businesses are resuming operations to varying degrees. At the same time, many households have been receiving stimulus payments and unemployment benefits, which are supporting incomes and spending. Activity in many parts of the economy has yet to pick up, however, and overall output is far below earlier levels. Moreover, despite the improvements seen in the May jobs report, unemployment remains historically high. Weak demand, especially in sectors most affected by the pandemic, is holding down consumer prices. As a result, inflation has fallen well below our symmetric 2 percent objective. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations have been fairly steady. The extent of the downturn and the pace of recovery remain extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on our success in containing the virus. We all want to get back to normal, but a full recovery is unlikely to occur until people are confident that it is safe to reengage in a broad range of activities. The severity of the downturn will also depend on the policy actions taken at all levels of government to provide relief and to support the recovery when the public health crisis passes. The Fed's response is guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time. In March, we quickly lowered our policy interest rate to near zero, where we expect to keep it until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. We have also been taking broad and forceful actions to support the flow of credit in the economy. Without access to credit, families could be forced to cut back on necessities or even lose their homes. Businesses could be forced to downsize or close, resulting in further losses of jobs and incomes and worsening the downturn. Preserving the flow of credit is thus essential for mitigating the damage to the economy and setting the stage for the recovery. Since March, we have been purchasing sizable quantities of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities in order to support the smooth functioning of these markets, which are vital to the flow of credit in the economy. Our ongoing purchases have helped to restore orderly market conditions and have fostered more accommodative financial conditions. As market functioning has improved since the strains experienced in March, we have gradually reduced the pace of these purchases. To sustain smooth market functioning and thereby foster the effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions, we will increase our holdings of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities over coming months at least at the current pace. We will closely monitor developments and are prepared to adjust our plans as appropriate to support our goals. The Federal Reserve is also undertaking programs to provide stability to the financial system and to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy-for households, for businesses of all sizes, and for state and local governments. These programs benefit the economy by providing financing where it is not otherwise available. In addition, by serving as a backstop to key credit markets, the programs can increase the willingness of private lenders to extend credit. Many of these programs rely on emergency lending powers that are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as these-those we find ourselves in today. We are deploying these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from Congress and from the Treasury. We will continue to use these powers forcefully, proactively, and aggressively until we're confident that we are solidly on the road to recovery. When the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the toolbox. I would stress that these are lending powers, not spending powers. The Fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. We can only create programs or facilities with broad-based eligibility to make loans to solvent entity-entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. Many borrowers will benefit from these programs, as will the overall economy. But for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. In these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. Elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. The CARES Act and other legislation provide direct help to people and businesses and communities. This direct support can make a critical difference not just in helping families and businesses in a time of need, but also in limiting long-lasting damage to our economy. At this meeting, my colleagues and I continued our discussion of approaches for conducting monetary policy when the federal funds rate is at its lower bound. The measures we discussed included explicit forms of forward guidance and asset purchases. We used these tools in the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, and they have become a standard part of our toolkit. We also reviewed the historical and foreign experience with targeting interest rates along the yield curve. Whether such an approach would usefully complement our main tools remains an open question. We will continue our discussions in upcoming meetings and will evaluate our monetary policy stance and communications as more information about the trajectory of the economy becomes available. We also resumed our regular quarterly Summary of Economic Projections, or the SEP. The SEP is an input into our deliberations, not an outcome, and it does not represent a Committee view. Rather, FOMC participants write down their individual views of the most likely path for the economy, conditioned on each participant's view of appropriate monetary policy. We tabulate those submissions, and we publish them as the SEP. Given the unusually high level of uncertainty about the outlook, many participants noted that they see a number of reasonably likely paths for the economy, and that it's not possible to identify with confidence a single path as the "most likely" one. Nonetheless, we believe that regular publication of the SEP provides a useful perspective on the way FOMC participants are assessing the path ahead. What the June SEP shows is a general expectation of an economic recovery beginning in the second half of this year and lasting over the next couple of years, supported by interest rates that remain at their current level, near zero. Of course, my colleagues and I will continue to base our policy decisions on the full range of plausible outcomes and not on a particular forecast. The risk-management approach-this risk-management approach is the best way we can promote our maximum-employment and price-stability goals in these unusually uncertain circumstances. Finally, I want to acknowledge the tragic events that have again put a spotlight on the pain of racial injustice in this country. The Federal Reserve serves the entire nation. We operate in, and are part of, many of the communities across the country where Americans are grappling with and expressing themselves on issues of racial equality. I speak for my colleagues throughout the Federal Reserve System when I say that there is no place at the Federal Reserve for racism and there should be no place for it in our society. Everyone deserves the opportunity to participate fully in our society and in our economy. These principles guide us in all we do, from monetary policy to our focus on diversity and inclusion in our workplace and to our work to ensure fair access to credit across the country. We will take this opportunity to renew our steadfast commitment to these principles. We understand that the work of the Fed touches communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you. I look forward to our questions.





2020.07.29
CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. The pandemic continues to cause tremendous human and economic hardship here in the United States and around the world. The most important response to this public health crisis has come from our health-care workers, and we remain grateful to them and to the many other essential workers for putting themselves at risk day after day in service to others and to our country. All of us have a role to play in our nation's response to the pandemic. At the Federal Reserve, we remain committed to using our tools to do what we can, and for as long as it takes, to provide some relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. In recent months, economic activity picked up as the economy began to reopen. Many businesses opened their doors, factories restarted production, and more people left their homes to engage in various activities. As a result, household spending looks to have recovered about half of its earlier decline, although spending for services such as air travel and hotels has shown much less of a pickup. The recovery in household spending also likely owes to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided substantial and timely support to household incomes. In contrast, indicators of business fixed investment have yet to show a recovery. Even with the improved economic news in May and June, overall activity remains well below its level before the pandemic, and the contraction in real GDP in the second quarter will likely be the largest on record. The labor market has followed a similar pattern. After precipitous drops in March and April, employment rose strongly in May and June as many people returned to work from temporary layoffs. As a result, of the roughly 22 million jobs that had been lost, about one-third had been regained as of the June payroll report. The unemployment rate declined in May and June but, at 11.1 percent, remains far above its level before the outbreak and greater than the peak during the Global Financial Crisis. In addition, the downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to bear the burden have been the most affected. In particular, the rise in joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers, for women, and for African Americans and Hispanics. This reversal of economic fortune has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. The pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. For some goods, including food, supply constraints have led to notably higher prices, adding to the burden for those struggling with lost income. More broadly, however, weaker demand, especially in sectors-such as travel and hospitality-that have been most affected by the pandemic, has held down consumer prices, and, overall, inflation is running well below our symmetric 2 percent objective. Along with the recent increases in economic activity have come new challenges. After declining gradually from a peak near the end of April, the number of COVID-19 cases has increased sharply in many parts of the country since mid-June. We have thus entered a new phase in containing the virus, which is essential to protect both our health and our economy. As we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the path forward for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on our success in keeping the virus in check. Indeed, we have seen some signs in recent weeks that the increase in virus cases and the renewed measures to control it are starting to weigh on economic activity. For example, some measures of consumer spending based on debit card and credit card use have moved down since late June, while recent labor market indicators point to a slowing in job growth, especially among smaller businesses. A full recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it's safe to reengage in a broad range of activities. The path forward will also depend on policy actions taken at all levels of government to provide relief and to support the recovery for as long as needed. The Federal Reserve's response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time. We have held our policy rate near zero since mid-March and have stated that we will keep it there until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. We've been purchasing sizable quantities of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities in order to support orderly conditions in the markets, which are vital to the flow of credit in the economy. To sustain smooth market functioning and foster effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace. These purchases are also fostering more accommodative financial conditions. The Federal Reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. Without access to credit, families could be forced to cut back on necessities or even lose their homes. Businesses could be forced to downsize or close, resulting in further job losses and income losses and worsening the downturn. Preserving the flow of credit is thus essential for mitigating the damage to the economy and promoting the recovery. Many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the Treasury Department and are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. These programs benefit the economy by providing financing where it is not otherwise available. In addition, by serving as a backstop to key credit markets, the programs appear to have significantly increased the extension of credit from private lenders. We are deploying these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. We will continue to use these powers until we are confident that we are solidly on the road to recovery. This week we extended these programs through the end of the year. When the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the toolbox. As I have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. The Fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. We can only create programs or facilities with broad-based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. Many borrowers will benefit from these programs, as will the overall economy. But for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. In these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. Elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. The fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. Even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe in our lifetimes. It will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of the year, and it will take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that. Before taking your questions, I'll provide an update on our review of our monetary policy framework. [Clears throat] Excuse me. As a reminder, we began this public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices-a first for the Federal Reserve-early last year. Our purpose has been to take a comprehensive look at how we can best meet our maximum-employment and price-stability objectives in the years ahead, particularly in light of the generally lower level of interest rates around the world. As is evident in our current situation, the lower level of interest rates has reduced the scope for the Committee to support the economy by cutting interest rates. Our plans to conclude this review were, like so many things, delayed by the pandemic. At this meeting, my colleagues and I resumed our discussions. Our focus was on possible enhancements to our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. This document states our goals, articulates our approach to monetary policy, and serves at the foundation-as the foundation for our policy actions. While I do not have any details to share with you today, I am confident that we will continue to make progress and will wrap up our deliberations in the near future. We understand that the work of the Fed touches communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you. I will look forward to your questions. 






2020.09.16
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference September 16, 2020 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us-maximum employment and price stability. Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide some relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. Today my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee and I made some important changes to our policy statement, including an update to our guidance for the likely path of our policy interest rate. Guided by our new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that we announced a few weeks ago, these changes clarify our strong commitment over a longer time horizon. Before describing today's policy actions, let me briefly review recent economic developments. Economic activity has picked up from its depressed second-quarter level, when much of the economy was shut down to stem the spread of the virus. With the reopening of many businesses and factories and fewer people withdrawing from social interactions, household spending looks to have recovered about three-quarters of its earlier decline. Nonetheless, spending on services that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality, is still quite weak. The recovery in household spending also likely owes to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided substantial and timely support to household incomes. Activity in the housing sector has returned to its level at the beginning of the year, and we are starting to see signs of an improvement in business investment. The recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, and forecasts from FOMC participants for economic growth this year have been revised up since our June Summary of Economic Projections. Even so, overall activity remains well below its level before the pandemic and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. In the labor market, roughly half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in March and April have been regained as many people returned to work. The unemployment rate declined over the past four months but remains elevated at 8.4 percent as of August. Although we welcome this progress, we will not lose sight of the millions of Americans who remain out of work. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the unemployment rate to continue to decline; the median projection is 7.6 percent at the end of this year, 5.5 percent next year, and 4 percent by 2023. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the services sector, for women, and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. The pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. For some goods, including food, supply constraints have led to notably higher prices, adding to the burden for those struggling with lost income. More broadly, however, weaker demand, especially in sectors that have been most affected by the pandemic, has held down consumer prices, and overall, inflation is running well below our 2 percent longer-run objective. The median inflation projection from FOMC participants rises from 1.2 percent this year to 1.7 percent next year and reaches 2 percent in 2023. As the economy began its recovery, COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths also rose. The reimposition of some social-distancing restrictions as well as more cautious behavior by many individuals have succeeded in slowing the spread of the virus. As we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the outlook for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on our success in keeping the virus in check. All of us have a role to play in our nation's response to the pandemic. Following the advice of public health professionals to keep appropriate social distances and to wear masks in public will help get the economy back to full strength. A full economic recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it is safe to reengage in a broad range of activities. The path forward will also depend on the policy actions taken across all parts of the government to provide relief and to support the recovery for as long as needed. The Federal Reserve's response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. We remain committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time. The changes we made in today's policy statement reflect our strategy to achieve our dual-mandate goals by seeking to eliminate shortfalls from maximum employment and achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, as we articulated in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. We view maximum employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal and do not see a high level of employment as posing a policy concern unless accompanied by signs of unwanted increases in inflation or the emergence of other risks that could impede the attainment of our goals. And we believe that achieving inflation that averages 2 percent over time helps ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at our longer-run 2 percent objective. In turn, well-anchored inflation expectations enhance our ability to meet both our employment and inflation objectives, particularly in the new normal in which interest rates are closer to their effective lower bound even in good times. Hence, as we say in our statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we "will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent." We expect "to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes"-including maximum employment-"are achieved." With regard to interest rates, we now indicate that we expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate "until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time." In addition, over coming months we will continue to increase our "holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace." These asset purchases are intended "to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses." We believe the strong policy guidance we are providing today will serve the economy well by promoting our goals through the many possible paths the recovery may take. Of course, as we note in our policy statement, we "would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of our [the Committee's] goals." The Federal Reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. Preserving the flow of credit is essential for mitigating the damage to the economy and promoting a robust recovery. Many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the Treasury Department and are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. These programs serve as a backstop to key credit markets and appear to have restored the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. We have deployed these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled, in large part, by financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. When the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the toolbox. As I have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. The Fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. We can only create programs or facilities with broad-based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. Many borrowers are benefiting from these programs, as is the overall economy. But for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. In these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. Elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. The fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. Even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe in our lifetimes. It will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of this year, and it may take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that. We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Finally, I would like to take a moment to recognize the passing of our friend and colleague, Thomas Laubach. His outstanding analysis and advice have been indispensable to the FOMC and have played a key role in the policy decisions that will define this era of the Federal Reserve. He will be remembered for his intellect, but also his kindness, his equanimity, and his dedication to achieving our mission on behalf of the American people. We will miss him. Thank you. I'll now be glad to take your questions.





2020.11.05
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference November 5, 2020 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us-maximum employment and price stability. Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. Today my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee and I reaffirmed our commitment to support the economy in this challenging time. Economic activity has continued to recover from its depressed second-quarter level. The reopening of the economy led to a rapid rebound in activity, and real GDP rose at an annual rate of 33 percent in the third quarter. In recent months, however, the pace of improvement has moderated. Household spending on goods, especially durable goods, has been strong and has moved above its pre-pandemic level. In contrast, spending on services remains low, largely due to ongoing weakness in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. The overall rebound in household spending owes, in part, to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided essential support to many families and individuals. The housing sector has fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. Business investment has also picked up. Even so, overall economic activity remains well below its level before the pandemic, and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. In the labor market, roughly half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in March and April have been regained, as many people were able to return to work. As with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market has moderated. The unemployment rate declined over the past five months but remained elevated at 7.9 percent as of September. Although we welcome this progress, we will not lose sight of the millions of Americans who remain out of work. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the services sector, for women, and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. The pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. Following large declines in the spring, consumer prices picked up over the summer, in part reflecting a rise in durable goods prices. However, for those sectors that have been most affected by the pandemic, prices remain particularly soft. Overall, on a 12-month basis, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer-run objective. As we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the outlook for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on the success of efforts to keep the virus in check. The recent rise in new COVID-19 cases, both here in the United States and abroad, is particularly concerning. All of us have a role to play in our nation's response to the pandemic. Following the advice of public health professionals to keep appropriate social distances and to wear masks in public will help get the economy back to full strength. A full economic recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it's safe to reengage in a broad range of activities. The Federal Reserve's response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. As noted in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we view maximum employment as a "broad-based and inclusive goal." Our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. As we said in September and again today, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, over coming months we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace. These asset purchases are intended to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. At this meeting, my colleagues and I discussed our asset purchases and the role they are playing in supporting the recovery. At the current pace, our holdings of securities are rising at a substantial rate of $120 billion per month-$80 billion per month of Treasuries and $40 billion per month of agency MBS. We believe these purchases, along with the very large purchases made to preserve financial stability in the depths of the crisis, have materially eased financial conditions and are providing substantial support to the economy. Looking ahead, we will continue to monitor developments and assess how our ongoing asset purchases can best support our maximum-employment and price-stability objectives as well as market functioning and financial stability. The Federal Reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. Preserving the flow of credit is essential for mitigating damage to the economy and promoting a robust recovery. Many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the Treasury Department and are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. These programs serve as a backstop to key credit markets and have helped to restore the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. We have deployed these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. When the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the toolbox. As I have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. The Fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. We can only create programs or facilities with broad-based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. Many borrowers are benefiting from these programs, as is the overall economy. But for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. In these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. Elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. The fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. Even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe in our lifetimes. It will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of this year, and it may take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that. I'd like to mention a couple of changes that we plan on making to our Summary of Economic Projections beginning in December. First, we will release the entire package of SEP materials at the same time that the FOMC statement comes out. Previously, some of these materials were released three weeks after the meeting as part of the minutes. This step will make more information available at the time of our policy announcements, including the distributions of forecasts and how participants judge the uncertainty and risks that attend their projections. Second, we will add two new graphs that show how the balance of participants' assessments of uncertainty and risks have evolved over time. These changes to the SEP will provide a timely perspective on the risks and uncertainties that surround the modal or baseline projections, thereby highlighting some of the risk-management considerations that are relevant for monetary policy. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 





2020.12.16
CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us-maximum employment and price stability. Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. Today my colleagues on the FOMC and I reaffirmed our strong forward guidance for interest rates and also provided additional guidance for our asset purchases. Together, these measures will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. Economic activity has continued to recover from its depressed second-quarter level. The substantial reopening of the economy led to a rapid rebound in activity, and real GDP rose at an annual rate of 33 percent in the third quarter. In recent months, however, the pace of improvement has moderated. Household spending on goods, especially durable goods, has been strong and has moved above its pre-pandemic level. In contrast, spending on services remains low, especially in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. The overall rebound in household spending owes in part to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided essential support to many families and individuals. The housing sector has fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. Business investment has also picked up. The recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, and forecasts from FOMC participants for economic growth this year have been revised up since our September Summary of Economic Projections. Even so, overall economic activity remains well below its level before the pandemic, and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. In the labor market, more than half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in March and April have been regained, as many people were able to return to work. As with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market has moderated. Job growth slowed to 245,000 in November, and while the unemployment rate has continued to decline, it remains elevated at 6.7 percent. Participation in the labor market remains notably below pre-pandemic levels. Although there has been much progress in the labor market since the spring, we will not lose sight of the millions of Americans who remain out of work. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the unemployment rate to continue to decline; the median projection is 5 percent at the end of next year and moves below 4 percent by 2023. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the service sector and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. The pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. Following large declines in the spring, consumer prices picked up over the summer but have leveled out more recently. For those sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, prices remain particularly soft. Overall, on a 12-month basis, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer-run objective. The median inflation projection from FOMC participants rises from 1.2 percent this year to 1.8 percent next year and reaches 2 percent in 2023. As we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the outlook for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on the course of the virus. Recent news on vaccines has been very positive. However, significant challenges and uncertainties remain with regard to the timing, production, and distribution of vaccines as well as their efficacy across different groups. It remains difficult to assess the timing and scope of the economic implications of these developments. The ongoing surge in new COVID-19 cases, both here in the United States and abroad, is particularly concerning, and the next few months are likely to be very challenging. All of us have a role to play in our nation's response to the pandemic. Following the advice of public health professionals to keep appropriate social distances and to wear masks in public will help get the economy back to full strength. A full economic recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it is safe to engage-reengage in a broad range of activities. As we previously announced, we are now releasing the entire package of our SEP materials at the same time as our FOMC statement. Included in these materials are two new exhibits that show how the balance of participants' assessments of uncertainty and risks have evolved over time. Since the onset of the pandemic, nearly all participants continue to judge the level of uncertainty about the economic outlook as elevated. In terms of risks to the outlook, fewer participants see the balance of risks as weighted to the downside than in September. While a little more than half of participants now judge risks to be broadly balanced for economic activity, a similar number continue to see risks weighted to the downside for inflation. The Fed's response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. As noted in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we view maximum employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal. Our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. As we reiterated in today's statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, as we noted in today's policy statement, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. We believe the increase in our balance sheet this year has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. Combined with our forward guidance for the federal funds rate, our enhanced balance sheet guidance will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. Our guidance is outcome based and is tied to progress toward reaching our employment and inflation goals. Thus, if progress toward our goals were to slow, the guidance would convey our intention to increase policy accommodation through a lower expected path of the federal funds rate and a higher expected path of the balance sheet. Overall, our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so. The Federal Reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. Preserving the flow of credit is essential for mitigating damage to the economy and promoting a robust recovery. Many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the Treasury Department and are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. These programs serve as a backstop to key credit markets and have helped to restore the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. We have deployed these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. Although funds from the CARES Act will not be available to support new loans or new purchases after-of assets after December 31, the Treasury could authorize support for emerging lending facilities, if needed, through the Exchange Stabilization Fund. When the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the box. As I have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. The Fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. We can only create programs or facilities with broad-based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. Many borrowers are benefiting from these programs, as is the overall economy. But for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. In these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. Elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. The fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. Even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe of our lifetimes. It will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of this year, and it may take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 





2021.01.27
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference January 27, 2021 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. Today my colleagues on the FOMC and I kept interest rates near zero and maintained our sizable asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. The path of the economy continues to depend significantly on the course of the virus. A resurgence in recent months in COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths is causing great hardship for millions of Americans and is weighing on economic activity and job creation. Following a sharp rebound in economic activity last summer, the pace of the recovery has moderated in recent months, with the weakness concentrated in the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the resurgence of the virus and by greater social distancing. Household spending on services remains low, especially in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. And household spending on goods has moderated following earlier large gains. In contrast, the housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. Business investment and manufacturing production have also picked up. The overall recovery in economic activity since last spring is due in part to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which have provided essential support to many families and individuals. The recently enacted Coronavirus Response and Relief Act [Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021] will provide additional support. Overall economic activity remains below its level before the pandemic, and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. As with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market has slowed in recent months. Employment fell by 140,000 in December, as continued gains in many industries were outweighed by significant losses in industries where the resurgence of the virus has weighed further on activity. In particular, the leisure and hospitality sector lost nearly half a million jobs, largely from restaurants and bars. The unemployment rate remained elevated at 6.7 percent in December, and participation in the labor market is notably below pre-pandemic levels. Although there has been much progress in the labor market since the spring, millions of Americans remain out of work. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the service sector and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. The pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. Following large declines in the spring, consumer prices picked up over the summer but have leveled out more recently. For those sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, prices remain particularly soft. Overall, on a 12-month basis, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer-run objective. While we should not underestimate the challenges we currently face, several developments point to an improved outlook for later this year. Sufficiently widespread vaccinations would enable us to put the pandemic behind us and return to more normal economic activities. In the meantime, continued observance of social-distancing measures and wearing masks will help us reach that goal as soon as possible. Support from fiscal policy will help households and businesses weather the downturn as well as limit lasting damage to the economy that could otherwise impede the recovery. In addition, as we have seen since last summer, the economy has proved more resilient than expected, in part reflecting the adaptability of households and businesses. Finally, monetary policy is playing a key role in supporting the recovery and will continue to do so. The Fed's response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. Today we unanimously reaffirmed our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, as we typically do each January. As we say in that statement, we view maximum employment as a "broad-based and inclusive goal." Our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. As the Committee reiterated in today's policy statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. The increase in our balance sheet since last March has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. The economy is a long way from our employment and inflation goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. Our forward guidance for the federal funds rate, along with our balance sheet guidance, will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. Our guidance is outcome based and ties the path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet to progress toward reaching our employment and inflation goals. Thus, if progress toward our goals were to slow, the guidance would convey our intention to increase policy accommodation through a lower expected path of the federal funds rate and a higher expected path of the balance sheet. Overall, our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so. We've also taken actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy, deploying our emergency lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from Congress and the Treasury. Although the CARES Act facilities are no-are no longer open to new activity, our other facilities remain in place. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you. I look forward to your questions.





2021.03.17
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference March 17, 2021 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. I would like to start by noting that it has been a full year since the pandemic arrived with force on our shores. Looking back, it was clear that addressing a fast-moving global pandemic would be plainly and primarily the realm of health-care providers and experts, and we are grateful to them and to all the essential workers for their service and sacrifice. The danger to the U.S. economy was also clear. Congress provided by far the fastest and largest response to any postwar economic downturn, offering fiscal support for households, businesses, health-care providers, and state and local governments. Here at the Federal Reserve, we rapidly deployed our full range of tools to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. We are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. The economic fallout has been real and widespread, but with the benefit of perspective, we can say that some of the very worst economic outcomes have been avoided by swift and forceful action-from Congress, from across government, and in cities and towns across the country. More people held on to their jobs, more businesses kept their doors open, and more incomes were saved as a result of these swift and forceful policy actions. And while we welcome these positive developments, no one should be complacent. At the Fed, we will continue to provide the economy the support that it needs for as long as it takes. Today the FOMC kept interest rates near zero and maintained our sizable asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. The path of the economy continues to depend significantly on the course of the virus and the measures undertaken to control its spread. Since January, the number of new cases, hospitalizations, and deaths has fallen, and ongoing vaccinations offer hope for a return to more normal conditions later this year. In the meantime, continued observance of social-distancing measures and wearing masks will help us reach that goal as soon as possible. The economic recovery remains uneven and far from complete, and the path ahead remains uncertain. Following the moderation in the pace of the recovery that began toward the end of last year, indicators of economic activity and employment have turned up recently, although the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the resurgence of the virus and by greater social distancing remain weak. Household spending on goods has risen notably so far this year. In contrast, household spending on services remains low, especially in services that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. The housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, while business investment and manufacturing production have also picked up. The overall recovery in economic activity since last spring is due importantly to unprecedented fiscal and monetary policy actions, which have provided essential support to households, businesses, and communities. The recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, and forecasts from FOMC participants for economic growth this year have been revised up notably since our December Summary of Economic Projections. In commenting on the stronger outlook, participants noted progress on vaccinations as well as recent fiscal policy. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have turned up recently. Employment rose by 379,000 in February, as the leisure and hospitality sector recouped about two-thirds of the jobs that were lost in December and January. Nonetheless, employment in this sector is more than 3 million below its level at the onset of the pandemic. For the economy as a whole, employment is 9.5 million below its pre-pandemic level. The unemployment rate remains elevated at 6.2 percent in February; this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market remains notably below pre-pandemic levels. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the unemployment rate to continue to decline; the median projection is 4.5 percent at the end of this year and moves down to 3.5 percent by the end of 2023. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the service sector and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. Overall inflation remains below our 2 percent longer-run objective. Over the next few months, 12-month measures of inflation will move up as the very low readings from March and April of last year fall out of the calculation. Beyond these base effects, we could also see upward pressure on prices if spending rebounds quickly as the economy continues to reopen, particularly if supply bottlenecks limit how quickly production can respond in the near term. However, these one-time increases in prices are likely to have only transient effects on inflation. The median inflation projection of FOMC participants is 2.4 percent this year and declines to 2 percent next year before moving back up by the end of 2023. The Fed's response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the financial-the stability of the financial system. As we say in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we view maximum employment as a "broad-based and inclusive goal." Our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. As the Committee reiterated in today's policy statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. I would note that a transitory rise in inflation above 2 percent, as seems likely to occur this year, would not meet this standard. In addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. The increase in our balance sheet since last March has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. The economy is a long way from our employment and inflation goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. Our forward guidance for the federal funds rate, along with our balance sheet guidance, will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. Our guidance is outcome based and ties the path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet to progress toward reaching our employment and inflation goals. Overall, our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Thank you. I look forward to your questions.





2021.04.28
April 28, 2021 Chair Powell's Press Conference FINAL Page 1 of 29 Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference April 28, 2021 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today my colleagues on the FOMC and I kept interest rates near zero and maintained our sizable asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. Widespread vaccinations, along with unprecedented fiscal policy actions, are also providing strong support to the recovery. Since the beginning of the year, indicators of economic activity and employment have strengthened. Household spending on goods has risen robustly. The housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, while business investment and manufacturing production have also increased. Spending on services has also picked up, including at restaurants and bars. More generally, the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak but have shown improvement. While the recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, it remains uneven and far from complete. The path of the economy continues to depend significantly on the course of the virus and the measures undertaken to control its spread. Since March, progress on vaccinations has limited the number of new cases, hospitalizations, and deaths. While the level of new cases remains concerning, especially as it reflects the spread of more infectious strains of the virus, continued vaccinations should allow for a return to more normal economic conditions later this year. In the April 28, 2021 Chair Powell's Press Conference FINAL Page 2 of 29 meantime, continued observance of public health and safety guidance will help us reach that goal as soon as possible. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. Employment rose 916,000 in March, as the leisure and hospitality sector posted a notable gain for the second consecutive month. Nonetheless, employment in this sector is still more than 3 million below its level at the onset of the pandemic. For the economy as a whole, payroll employment is 8.4 million below its pre-pandemic level. The unemployment rate remained elevated at 6 percent in March, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market remains notably below pre-pandemic levels. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. In particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the service sector and for African Americans and Hispanics. The economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. Readings on inflation have increased and are likely to rise somewhat further before moderating. In the near term, 12-month measures of PCE inflation are expected to move above 2 percent as the very low readings from early in the pandemic fall out of the calculation and past increases in oil prices pass through to consumer energy prices. Beyond these effects, we are also likely to see upward pressure on prices from the rebound in spending as the economy continues to reopen, particularly if supply bottlenecks limit how quickly production can respond in the near term. However, these one-time increases in prices are likely to have only transitory effects on inflation. April 28, 2021 Chair Powell's Press Conference FINAL Page 3 of 29 The Fed's response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. As we say in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, we view maximum employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal. Our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. As the Committee reiterated in today's policy statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. I would note that a transitory rise in inflation above 2 percent this year would not meet this standard. In addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. The increase in our balance sheet since March 2020 has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. The economy is a long way from our goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. April 28, 2021 Chair Powell's Press Conference FINAL Page 4 of 29 Our guidance for interest rates and asset purchases ties the path of the federal funds rate and the size of the balance sheet to our employment and inflation goals. This outcome-based guidance will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 





2021.06.16
CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today the Federal Open Market Committee kept interest rates near zero and maintained our asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. Widespread vaccinations, along with unprecedented fiscal policy actions, are also providing strong support to the recovery. Indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen, and real GDP this year appears to be on track to post its fastest rate of increase in decades. Much of this rapid growth reflects the continued bounceback in activity from depressed levels. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak but have shown improvement. Household spending is rising at a rapid pace, boosted by the ongoing reopening of the economy, fiscal support, and accommodative financial conditions. The housing sector is strong, and business investment is increasing at a solid pace. In some industries, near-term supply constraints are restraining activity. Forecasts from FOMC participants for economic growth this year have been revised up since our March Summary of Economic Projections. Even so, the recovery is incomplete, and risks to the economic outlook remain. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve, although the pace of improvement has been uneven. Employment rose 419,000 per month, on average, in April and May, with the leisure and hospitality sector continuing to post notable gains. Employment in this sector and the economy as a whole remains well below pre-pandemic levels. The unemployment rate remained elevated in May at 5.8 percent, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. Factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs, ongoing fears of the virus, and unemployment insurance payments, appear to be weighing on employment growth. These factors should wane in coming months against a backdrop of rising vaccinations, leading to more rapid gains in employment. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the labor market to continue to improve, with the median projection for the unemployment rate standing at 4.5 percent at the end of this year and declining to 3.5 percent by the end of 2023. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower-wage workers in the service sector and on African Americans and Hispanics. Inflation has increased notably in recent months. The 12-month change in PCE prices was 3.6 percent in April and will likely remain elevated in coming months before moderating. Part of the increase reflects the very low readings from early in the pandemic falling out of the calculation as well as the pass-through of past increases in oil prices to, to consumer energy prices. Beyond these effects, we are also seeing upward pressure on prices from the rebound in spending as the economy continues to reopen, particularly as supply bottlenecks have limited how quickly production in some sectors can respond in the near term. These bottleneck effects have been larger than anticipated, and FOMC participants have revised up their projections for, for inflation notably for this year. As these transitory supply effects abate, inflation is expected to drop back toward our longer-run goal, and the median inflation projection falls from 3.4 percent this year to 2.1 percent next year and 2.2 percent in 2023. The process of reopening the economy is unprecedented, as was the shutdown at the onset of the pandemic. As the reopening continues, shifts in demand can be large and rapid, and bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other constraints could continue to limit how quickly supply can adjust, raising the possibility that inflation could turn out to be higher and more persistent than we expect. Our new framework for monetary policy emphasizes the importance of having well-anchored inflation expectations, both to foster price stability and to enhance our ability to promote our broad-based and inclusive maximum-employment goal. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations have generally reversed the declines seen earlier in the pandemic and have moved into a range that appears broadly consistent with our longer-run inflation goal of 2 percent. If we saw signs that the path of inflation or longer-term inflation expectations were moving materially and persistently beyond levels consistent with our goal, we'd be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy. The pandemic continues to pose risks to the economic outlook. Progress on vaccinations has limited the spread of COVID-19 and will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy. However, the pace of vaccinations has slowed, and new strains of the virus remain a risk. Continued progress on vaccinations will support a return to more normal economic conditions. The Fed's policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. As the Committee reiterated in today's policy statement, with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. As is evident in the SEP, many participants forecast that these favorable economic conditions will be met somewhat sooner than previously projected; the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate now lies above the effective lower bound in 2023. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a couple of years from now. More important than any forecast is the fact that, whenever liftoff comes, policy will remain highly accommodative. Reaching the conditions for liftoff will mainly signal that the recovery is strong and no longer requires holding rates near zero. In addition, we are continuing to increase-continuing to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. The increase in our balance sheet since March 2020 has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. At our meeting that concluded earlier today, the Committee had a discussion on the progress made toward our goals since the Committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last December. While reaching the standard of "substantial further progress" is still a ways off, participants expect that progress will continue. In coming meetings, the Committee will continue to assess the economy's progress toward our goals. As we have said, we will provide advance notice before announcing any decision to make changes to our purchases. On a final note, we made a technical adjustment today to the Federal Reserve's administered rates. The IOER and overnight RRP rates were adjusted upward by 5 basis points in order to keep the federal funds rate well within the target range and to support smooth functioning in money markets. This technical adjustment has no bearing on the appropriate path for the federal funds rate or stance of monetary policy. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 





2021.07.28
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference July 28, 2021 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today the Federal Open Market Committee kept interest rates near zero and maintained our asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to support the economy until the recovery is complete. Progress in vaccinations and unprecedented fiscal policy actions are also providing strong support to the recovery. Indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen, and real GDP this year appears to be on track to post its fastest rate of increase in decades. Much of this rapid growth reflects the continued bounceback in activity from depressed levels. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have shown improvement but have not fully recovered. Household spending is rising at an especially rapid pace, boosted by the ongoing reopening of the economy and ongoing policy support. The housing sector remains very strong, and business investment is increasing at a solid pace. In some industries, near-term supply constraints are restraining activity. These constraints are particularly acute in the motor vehicle industry, where worldwide shortages of semiconductors have sharply curtailed production so far this year. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. Demand for labor is very strong, and employment rose 850,000 in June, with the leisure and hospitality sector continuing to post notable gains. Nonetheless, the labor market has a ways to go. The unemployment rate in June-in June was 5.9 percent, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. Factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs, ongoing fears of the virus, and unemployment insurance payments, appear to be weighing on employment growth. These factors should wane in coming months, leading to strong gains in employment. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower-wage workers in the service sector and on African Americans and Hispanics. Inflation has increased notably and will likely remain elevated in coming months before moderating. As the economy continues to reopen and spending rebounds, we are seeing upward pressure on prices, particularly because supply bottlenecks in some sectors have limited how quickly production can respond in the near term. These bottleneck effects have been larger than anticipated, but as these transitory supply effects abate, inflation is expected to drop back toward our longer-run goal. Very low readings from early in the pandemic as well as the pass-through of past increases in oil prices to consumer energy prices also contribute to the increase, although these base effects and energy effects are receding. The process of reopening the economy is unprecedented, as was the shutdown at the onset of the pandemic. As the reopening continues, bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other constraints could continue to limit how quickly supply can adjust, raising the possibility that inflation could turn out to be higher and more persistent than we expect. Our new framework for monetary policy emphasizes the importance of having well-anchored inflation expectations, both to, to foster price stability and to enhance our ability to promote our broad-based and inclusive maximum-employment goal. Indicators of long-term inflation expectations appear broadly consistent with our longer-run inflation goal of 2 percent. If we saw signs that the path of inflation or longer-term inflation expectations were moving materially and persistently beyond levels consistent with our goal, we'd be prepared to adjust the stance of policy. The effects of the pandemic on the economy have continued to diminish, but risks to the economic outlook remain. Progress on vaccinations has limited the spread of COVID-19. However, the pace of vaccinations has slowed, and the Delta strain of the virus is spreading quickly in some areas. Continued progress on vaccinations would support a return to more normal economic conditions. The Fed's policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. As the Committee reiterated in today's policy statement, with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. With regard to interest rates, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached level-levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, we are continuing to-continuing to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency MBS by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Our asset purchases have been a critical tool. They helped preserve financial stability and market functioning early in the pandemic and since then have helped foster accommodative financial conditions to support the economy. At our meeting that concluded earlier today, the Committee continued to discuss the progress made toward our-toward our goals since the Committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last December. We also reviewed some considerations around how our asset purchases might be adjusted, including their pace and composition, once economic conditions warrant a change. Participants expect that the economy will continue to move toward our standard of "substantial further progress." In coming meetings, the Committee will again assess the economy's progress toward our goals, and the timing of any change in the pace of our asset purchases will depend on the incoming data. As we've said, we will provide advance notice before making any changes to our purchases. On a final note, we announced the establishment of two standing repo facilities, a domestic one for primary dealers and additional banks and another for foreign and international monetary authorities. These facilities will serve as backstops in money markets to support the effective implementation of monetary policy and smooth market functioning. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 





2021.09.22
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference September 22, 2021 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today, the Federal Open Market Committee kept interest rates near zero and maintained our current pace of asset purchases. These measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to support the economy until the recovery is complete. Progress on vaccinations and unprecedented fiscal policy actions are also providing strong support to the recovery. Indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. Real GDP rose at a robust 6.4 percent pace in the first half of the year, and growth is widely expected to continue at a strong pace in the second half. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months, but the rise in COVID-19 cases has slowed their recovery. Household spending rose at an especially rapid pace over the first half of the year but flattened out in July and August as spending softened in COVID-sensitive sectors, such as travel and restaurants. Additionally, in some industries, near-term supply constraints are restraining activity. These constraints are particularly acute in the motor vehicle industry, where the worldwide shortage of semiconductors has sharply curtailed production. Partly reflecting the effects of the virus and supply constraints, forecasts from FOMC participants for economic growth this year have been revised somewhat lower since our June Summary of Economic Projections, but participants still foresee rapid growth. As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. Demand for labor is very strong, and job gains averaged 750,000 per month over the past three months. In August, however, job gains slowed markedly, with the slowdown concentrated in sectors most sensitive to the pandemic, including leisure and hospitality. The unemployment rate was 5.2 percent in August, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. Factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs and ongoing fears of the virus, appear to be weighing on employment growth. These factors should diminish with progress on containing the virus, leading to more rapid gains in employment. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the labor market to continue to improve, with the median projection for the unemployment rate standing at 4.8 percent at the end of this year and 3.5 percent in 2023 and '24. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower-wage workers in the service sector and on African Americans and Hispanics. Inflation is elevated and will likely remain so in coming months before moderating. As the economy continues to reopen and spending rebounds, we are seeing upward pressure on prices, particularly because supply bottlenecks in some sectors have limited how quickly production can respond in the near term. These bottleneck effects have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, leading to upward revisions to participants' inflation projections for this year. While these supply effects are prominent for now, they will abate, and as they do, inflation is expected to drop back toward our longer-run goal. The median inflation projection from FOMC participants falls from 4.2 percent this year to 2.2 percent next year. The process of reopening the economy is unprecedented, as was the shutdown at the onset of the pandemic. As the reopening continues, bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other constraints could again prove to be greater and longer lasting than anticipated, posing upside risks to inflation. Our framework for monetary policy emphasizes the importance of having well-anchored inflation expectations, both to foster price stability and to enhance our ability to promote our broad-based and inclusive maximum-employment goal. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations appear broadly consistent with our longer-run inflation goal of 2 percent. If sustained higher inflation were to become a serious concern, we would certainly respond and use our tools to assure that inflation runs at levels that are consistent with our goal. The path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus, and risks to the economic outlook remain. The Delta variant has led to significant increases in COVID-19 cases, resulting in significant hardship and loss and slowing the economic recovery. Continued progress on vaccinations would help contain the virus and support a return to more normal economic conditions. The Fed's policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. Our asset purchases have been a critical tool. They helped preserve financial stability and market functioning early in the pandemic and since then have helped foster accommodative financial conditions to support the economy. At our meeting that concluded earlier today, the Committee continued to discuss the progress made toward our goals since the Committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last December. Since then, the economy has made progress toward these goals. If progress continues broadly as expected, the Committee judges that a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. We also discussed the appropriate pace of tapering asset purchases once economic conditions satisfy the criterion laid out in the Committee's guidance. While no decisions were made, participants generally view that, so long as the recovery remains on track, a gradual tapering process that concludes around the middle of next year is likely to be appropriate. Even after our balance sheet stops expanding, our elevated holdings of longer-term securities will continue to support accommodative financial conditions. The timing and pace of the coming reduction in asset purchases will not be intended to carry a direct signal regarding the timing of interest rate liftoff, for which we have articulated a different and substantially more stringent test. We continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. Half of FOMC participants forecast that these favorable economic conditions will be fulfilled by the end of next year; as a result, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate lies slightly above the effective lower bound in 2022. Participants generally expect a gradual pace of policy firming that would leave the level of the federal funds rate below estimates of its longer-run level through 2024. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. More important than any forecast is the fact that policy will remain accommodative until we have achieved our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.





2021.11.03
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference November 3, 2021 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today, the FOMC kept interest rates near zero and, in light of the progress the economy has made toward our goals, decided to begin reducing the pace of asset purchases. With these actions, monetary policy will continue to provide strong support to the economic recovery. Given the unprecedented nature of the disruptions related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy, we remain attentive to risks and will ensure that our policy is well positioned to address the full range of plausible economic outcomes. I will say more about our monetary policy decisions after reviewing recent economic developments. Economic activity expanded at a 6.5 percent pace in the first half of the year, reflecting progress on vaccinations, the reopening of the economy, and strong policy support. In the third quarter, real GDP growth slowed notably from this rapid pace. The summer's surge in COVID cases from the Delta variant has held back the recovery in the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic, including travel and leisure. Activity has also been restrained by supply constraints and bottlenecks, notably in the motor vehicle industry. As a result, both household spending and business investment flattened out last quarter. Nonetheless, aggregate demand has been very strong this year, buoyed by fiscal and monetary policy support and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. With COVID case counts receding further and progress on vaccinations, economic growth should pick up this quarter, resulting in strong growth for the year as a whole. Conditions in the labor market have continued to improve, and demand for workers remains very strong. As with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement slowed with the rise in COVID cases. In August and September, job gains averaged 280,000 per month, down from an average of about 1 million jobs per month in June and July. The slowdown has been concentrated in sectors most sensitive to the pandemic, including leisure and hospitality and education. The unemployment rate was 4.8 percent in September. This figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market remains subdued. Some of the softness in participation likely reflects the aging of the population and retirements. But participation for prime-aged individuals also remains well below pre-pandemic levels-in part reflecting factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs and ongoing concerns about the virus. As a result, employers are having difficulties filling job openings. These impediments to labor supply should diminish with further progress on containing the virus-supporting gains in employment and economic activity. The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. Despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on African Americans and Hispanics. The supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have contributed to sizable price increases in some sectors. In particular, bottlenecks and supply chain disruptions are limiting how quickly production can respond to the rebound in demand in the near term. As a result, overall inflation is running well above our 2 percent longer-run goal. Supply constraints have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated. Nonetheless, it remains the case that the drivers of higher inflation have been predominantly connected to the dislocations caused by the pandemic-specifically, the effects on supply and demand from the shutdown, the uneven reopening, and the ongoing effects of the virus itself. We understand the difficulties that high inflation poses for individuals and families, particularly those with limited means to absorb higher prices for essentials such as food and transportation. Our tools cannot ease supply constraints. Like most forecasters, we continue to believe that our dynamic economy will adjust to the supply and demand imbalances and that, as it does, inflation will decline to levels much closer to our 2 percent longer-run goal. Of course, it is very difficult to predict the persistence of supply constraints or their effects on inflation. Global supply chains are complex; they will return to normal function, but the timing of that is highly uncertain. We are committed to our longer-run goal of 2 percent inflation and to having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at this goal. If we were to see signs that the path of inflation, or [of] longer-term inflation expectations, was moving materially and persistently beyond levels consistent with our goal, we would use our tools to preserve price stability. We will be watching carefully to see whether the economy is evolving in line with expectations. The Fed's policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. Our asset purchases have been a critical tool. They helped preserve financial stability early in the pandemic and since then have helped foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions to support the economy. Last December, the Committee stated its intention to continue asset purchases at a pace of at least $120 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. At today's meeting, the Committee judged that the economy has met this test, and decided to begin reducing the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning later this month, we will reduce the monthly pace of our net asset purchases by $10 billion for Treasury securities and $5 billion for agency mortgage-backed securities. We also announced another reduction of this size in the monthly purchase pace starting in mid-December, since that month's purchase schedule will be released by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York prior to our December FOMC meeting. If the economy evolves broadly as expected, we judge that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, implying that increases in our securities holdings would cease by the middle of next year. That said, we are prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. And even after our balance sheet stops expanding, our holdings of securities will continue to support accommodative financial conditions. Our decision today to begin tapering our asset purchases does not imply any direct signal regarding our interest rate policy. We continue to articulate a different and more stringent test for the economic conditions that would need to be met before raising the federal funds rate. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to complete the recovery in employment and achieve our price-stability goal. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 





2021.12.15
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference December 15, 2021 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today, in support of these goals, the Federal Open Market Committee kept interest rates near zero and updated its assessment of the progress that the economy has made toward the criteria specified in the Committee's forward guidance for interest rates. In addition, in light of the strengthening labor market and elevated inflation pressures, we decided to speed up the reductions in our asset purchases. As I will explain, economic developments and changes in the outlook warrant this evolution of monetary policy, which will continue to provide appropriate support for the economy. Economic activity is on track to expand at a robust pace this year, reflecting progress on vaccinations and the reopening of the economy. Aggregate demand remains very strong, buoyed by fiscal and monetary policy support and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. The rise in COVID cases in recent weeks, along with the emergence of the Omicron variant, pose[s] risks to the outlook. Notwithstanding the effects of the virus and supply constraints, FOMC participants continue to foresee rapid growth. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median projection for real GDP growth stands at 5.5 percent this year and 4 percent next year. Amid improving labor market conditions and very strong demand for workers, the economy has been making rapid progress toward maximum employment. Job gains have been solid in recent months, averaging 378,000 per month over the last three months. The unemployment rate has declined substantially-falling 6/10 of a percentage point since our last meeting and reaching 4.2 percent in November. The recent improvements in labor market conditions have narrowed the differences in employment across groups, especially for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution, as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor force participation showed a welcome rise in November-but remains subdued, in part reflecting the aging of the population and retirements. In addition, some who otherwise would be seeking work report that they are out of the labor force because of factors related to the pandemic, including caregiving needs and ongoing concerns about the virus. At the same time, employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at their fastest pace in many years. How long the labor shortages will persist is unclear, particularly if additional waves of the virus occur. Looking ahead, FOMC participants project the labor market to continue to improve, with the median projection for the unemployment rate declining to 3.5 percent by the end of the year. Compared with the projections made in September, participants have revised their unemployment rate projections noticeably lower for this year and next. Supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and [to] the reopening of the economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. In particular, bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond to higher demand in the near term. These problems have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, exacerbated by waves of the virus. As a result, overall inflation is running well above our 2 percent longer-run goal and will likely continue to do so well into next year. While the drivers of higher inflation have been predominantly connected to the dislocations caused by the pandemic, price increases have now spread to a broader range of goods and services. Wages have also risen briskly, but, thus far, wage growth has not been a major contributor to the elevated levels of inflation. We are attentive to the risks that persistent real wage growth in excess of productivity [growth] could put upward pressure on inflation. Like most forecasters, we continue to expect inflation to decline to levels closer to our 2 percent longer-run goal by the end of next year. The median inflation projection of FOMC participants falls from 5.3 percent this year to 2.6 percent next year; this trajectory is notably higher than projected in September. We understand that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are committed to our price-stability goal. We will use our tools both to support the economy and a strong labor market and to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched. We will be watching carefully to see whether the economy is evolving in line with expectations. The Fed's monetary policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. In support of these goals, the Committee reaffirmed the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate. We also updated our assessment of the progress the economy has made toward the criteria specified in our forward guidance for the federal funds rate. With inflation having exceeded 2 percent for some time, the Committee expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment. All FOMC participants forecast that this remaining test will be met next year. The median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 0.9 percent at the end of 2022, about ½ percentage point higher than projected in September. Participants expect a gradual pace of policy firming, with the level of the federal funds rate generally near estimates of its longer-run level by the end of 2024. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. At today's meeting, the Committee also decided to double the pace of reductions in its asset purchases. Beginning in mid-January, we will reduce the monthly pace of our net asset purchases by $20 billion for Treasury securities and $10 billion for agency mortgage-backed securities. If the economy evolves broadly as expected, similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, implying that increases in our securities holdings would cease by mid-March-a few months sooner than we anticipated in early November. We are phasing out our purchases more rapidly because, with elevated inflation pressures and a rapidly strengthening labor market, the economy no longer needs increasing amounts of policy support. In addition, a quicker conclusion of our asset purchases will better position policy to address the full range of plausible economic outcomes. We remain prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. And, even after our balance sheet stops expanding, our holdings of securities will continue to foster accommodative financial conditions. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to complete the recovery in employment and achieve our price-stability goal. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 




2022.01.26
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference January 26, 2022 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today, in support of these goals, the Federal Open Market Committee kept its policy interest rate near zero and stated its expectation that an increase in this rate would soon be appropriate. The Committee also agreed to continue reducing its net asset purchases on the schedule we announced in December-bringing them to an end in early March. As I will explain, against a backdrop of elevated inflation and a strong labor market, our policy has been adapting to the evolving economic environment, and it will continue to do so. Economic activity expanded at a robust pace last year, reflecting progress on vaccinations and the reopening of the economy, fiscal and monetary policy support, and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. Indeed, the economy has shown great strength and resilience in the face of the ongoing pandemic. The recent sharp rise in COVID cases associated with the Omicron variant will surely weigh on economic growth this quarter. High-frequency indicators point to reduced spending in COVID-sensitive sectors, such as travel and restaurants. And activity more broadly may also be affected as many workers are unable to report for work because of illness, quarantines, or caregiving needs. Fortunately, health experts are finding that the Omicron variant has not been as virulent as previous strains of the virus, and they expect that cases will drop off rapidly. If the wave passes quickly, the economic effects should as well, and we would see a return to strong growth. That said, the implications for the economy remain uncertain. And we have not lost sight of the fact that for many afflicted individuals and families, and for the health-care workers on the front lines, the virus continues to cause great hardship. The labor market has made remarkable progress and, by many measures, is very strong. Job gains have been solid in recent months, averaging 365,000 per month over the past three months. Over the past year, payroll employment has risen by 6.4 million jobs. The unemployment rate has declined sharply, falling 2 percentage points over the past six months to reach 3.9 percent in December. The improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution, as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor demand remains historically strong. With constraints on labor supply, employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at their fastest pace in many years. While labor force participation has edged up, it remains subdued, in part reflecting the aging of the population and retirements. In addition, some who would otherwise would be seeking work report that they are out of the labor force because of factors related to the pandemic, including caregiving needs and ongoing concerns about the virus. The current wave of the virus may well prolong these effects. Over time, there are good reasons to expect some further improvements in participation and employment. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and [to] the reopening of the economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. In particular, bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond to higher demand in the near term. These problems have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, exacerbated by waves of the virus. While the drivers of higher inflation have been predominantly connected to the dislocations caused by the pandemic, price increases have now spread to a broader range of goods and services. Wages have also risen briskly, and we are attentive to the risks that persistent real wage growth in excess of productivity [growth] could put upward pressure on inflation. Like most forecasters, we continue to expect inflation to decline over the course of the year. We understand that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. In addition, we believe that the best thing we can do to support continued labor market gains is to promote a long expansion, and that will require price stability. We are committed to our price-stability goal. We will use our tools both to support the economy and a strong labor market and to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched. And we'll be watching carefully to see whether the economy is evolving in line with expectations. The Fed's monetary policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. As I noted, the Committee left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged and reaffirmed our plan, announced in December, to end asset purchases in early March. In light of the remarkable progress we've seen in the labor market and inflation that is well above our 2 percent longer-run goal, the economy no longer needs sustained high levels of monetary policy support. That is why we are phasing out our asset purchases and why we expect it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. Of course, the economic outlook remains highly uncertain. Making appropriate monetary policy in this environment requires humility, recognizing that the economy evolves in unexpected ways. We'll need to be nimble so that we can respond to the full range of plausible outcomes. With this in mind, we will remain attentive to risks, including the risk that high inflation is more persistent than expected, and are prepared to respond as appropriate to achieve our goals. To provide greater clarity about our approach for reducing the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, today the Committee issued a set of principles that will provide a foundation for our future decisions. [In] these high-level principles, [we] clarify that the federal funds rate is our primary means of adjusting monetary policy and that reducing our balance sheet will occur after the process of raising interest rates has begun. Reductions will occur over time in a predictable manner primarily through adjustments to reinvestments so that securities roll off our balance sheet. Over time, we intend to hold securities in the amounts needed for our ample-reserves operating framework, and in the longer run, we envision holding primarily Treasury securities. Our decisions to reduce our balance sheet will be guided by our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. In that regard, we will be prepared to adjust any of the details of our approach to balance sheet management in light of economic and financial developments. The Committee has not made decisions regarding the specific timing, pace, or other details of shrinking the balance sheet. And we will discuss these matters in upcoming meetings and provide additional information at the appropriate time. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Federal Reserve will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions.





2022.03.16
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference March 16, 2022 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. I want to begin by acknowledging the tremendous hardship the Ukrainian people are suffering as a result of Russia's invasion. The human toll is tragic. The financial and economic implications for the global economy and the U.S. economy are highly uncertain. At the Federal Reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that Congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. Today, in support of these goals, the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by ¼ percentage point. The economy is very strong, and against the backdrop of an extremely tight labor market and high inflation, the Committee anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate. In addition, we expect to begin reducing the size of our balance sheet at a coming meeting. Economic activity expanded at a robust 5½ percent pace last year, reflecting progress on vaccinations and the reopening of the economy, fiscal and monetary policy support, and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. The rapid spread of the Omicron variant led to some slowing in economic activity early this year. But cases have declined sharply since mid-January, and the slowdown seems to have been mild and brief. Although the invasion of Ukraine and related events represent a downside risk to the outlook for economic activity, FOMC participants continue to foresee solid growth. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection for real GDP growth stands at 2.8 percent this year, 2.2 percent next year, and 2 percent in 2024. The labor market has continued to strengthen and is extremely tight. Over the first two months of the year, employment rose by more than a million jobs. In February, the unemployment rate hit a post-pandemic low of 3.8 percent, a bit below the median of Committee participants' estimates of its longer-run normal level. The improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor demand is very strong, and while labor force participation has increased somewhat, labor supply remains subdued. As a result, employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at their fastest pace in many years. FOMC participants expect the labor market to remain strong, with the median projection for the unemployment rate declining to 3.5 percent by the end of this year and remaining near that level thereafter. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Aggregate demand is strong, and bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond. These supply disruptions have been larger, and longer lasting, than anticipated, exacerbated by waves of the virus here and abroad, and price pressures have spread to a broader range of goods and services. Additionally, higher energy prices are driving up overall inflation. The surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from Russia's invasion of Ukraine will put additional upward pressure on near-term inflation here at home. We understand that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We know that the best thing we can do to support a strong labor market is to promote a long expansion-and that is only possible in an environment of price stability. As we emphasize in our policy statement, with appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, we expect inflation to return to 2 percent while the labor market remains strong. That said, inflation is likely to take longer to return to our price-stability goal than previously expected. The median inflation projection of FOMC participants is 4.3 percent this year and falls to 2.7 percent next year and 2.3 percent in 2024; this trajectory is notably higher than projected in December, and participants continue to see risks as weighted to the upside. The Fed's monetary policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. Our policy has been adapting to the evolving economic environment, and it will continue to do so. As I noted, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. The median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 1.9 percent at the end of this year-a full percentage point higher than projected in December. Over the following two years, the median projection is 2.8 percent-somewhat higher than the median estimate of its longer-run value. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. Reducing the size of our balance sheet will also play an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. At our meeting that wrapped up today, the Committee made good progress on a plan for reducing our securities holdings, and we expect to announce the beginning of balance sheet reduction at a coming meeting. In making decisions about interest rates and the balance sheet, we will be mindful of the broader context in markets and in the economy, and we will use our tools to support financial and macroeconomic stability. As we noted in our policy statement, the implications of Russia's invasion of Ukraine for the U.S. economy are highly uncertain. In addition to the direct effects from higher global oil and commodity prices, the invasion and related events may restrain economic activity abroad and further disrupt supply chains-which would create spillovers to the U.S. economy through trade and other channels. The volatility in financial markets, particularly if sustained, could also act to tighten credit conditions and affect the real economy. Making appropriate monetary policy in this environment requires a recognition that the economy often evolves in unexpected ways. We will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. And we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty to what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain moment. We are attentive to the risks of potential further upward pressure on inflation and inflation expectations. The Committee is determined to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. The American economy is very strong and well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 





2022.05.04
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference May 4, 2022 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. It's nice to see everyone in person for the first time in a couple years. Before I go into the details of today's meeting, I'd like to take this opportunity to speak directly to the American people. Inflation is much too high, and we understand the hardship it is causing, and we're moving expeditiously to bring it back down. We have both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price stability on behalf of American families and businesses. The economy and the country have been through a lot over the past two years and have proved resilient. It is essential that we bring inflation down if we are to have a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. From the standpoint of our Congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the current picture is plain to see: The labor market is extremely tight, and inflation is much too high. Against this backdrop, today the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by ½ percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target rate for the federal funds rate will be appropriate. In addition, we are beginning the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. I'll have more to say about today's monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. After expanding at a robust 5½ percent pace last year, overall economic activity edged down in the first quarter. Underlying momentum remains strong, however, as the decline largely reflected swings in inventories and net exports-two volatile categories whose movements last quarter likely carry little signal for future growth. Indeed, household spending and business fixed investment continued to expand briskly. The labor market has continued to strengthen and is extremely tight. Over the first three months of the year, employment rose by nearly 1.7 million jobs. In March, the unemployment rate hit a post-pandemic, and near-five-decade, low of 3.6 percent. Improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor demand is very strong, and, while labor force participation has increased somewhat, labor supply remains subdued. Employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at the fastest pace in many years. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in March, total PCE prices rose 6.6 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 5.2 percent. Aggregate demand is strong, and bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond. Disruptions to supply have been larger, and longer lasting, than anticipated, and price pressures have spread to a broader range of goods and services. The surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from Russia's invasion of Ukraine is creating additional upward pressure on inflation. And COVID-related lockdowns in China are likely to further exacerbate supply chain disruptions as well. Russia's invasion of Ukraine is causing tremendous loss and hardship, and our thoughts and sympathies are with the people of Ukraine. Our job is to consider the implications for the U.S. economy, which remain highly uncertain. In addition to the effects on inflation, the invasion and related events are likely to restrain economic activity abroad and further disrupt supply chains, creating spillovers to the U.S. economy through trade and other channels. The Fed's monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to restoring price stability. Against the backdrop of the rapidly evolving economic environment, our policy has been adapting, and it will continue to do so. At today's meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ½ percentage point and stated that it "anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate." We also decided to begin the process of reducing the size of our balance sheet, which will play an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. We are on a path to move our policy rate expeditiously to more normal levels. Assuming that economic and financial conditions evolve in line with expectations, there is a broad sense on the Committee that additional 50-basis-point increases should be on the table at the next couple of meetings. We will make our decisions meeting by meeting as we learn from incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. And we will continue to communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. With regard to our balance sheet, we also issued our specific plans for reducing our securities holdings. Consistent with the principles we issued in January, we intend to significantly reduce the size of our balance sheet over time in a predictable manner by allowing the principal payments from our securities holdings to roll off the balance sheet, up to monthly cap amounts. For Treasury securities, the cap will be $30 billion per month for three months and will then increase to $60 billion per month. The decline in holdings of Treasury securities under this monthly cap will include Treasury coupon securities and, to the extent that coupon securities are less than the monthly cap, Treasury bills. For agency mortgage-backed securities, the cap will be $17.5 billion per month for three months and will then increase to $35 billion per month. At the current level of mortgage rates, the actual pace of agency MBS runoff would likely be less than this monthly cap amount. Our balance sheet decisions are guided by our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. And, in that regard, we will be prepared to adjust any of the details of our approach in light of economic and financial developments. Making appropriate monetary policy in this uncertain environment requires a recognition that the economy often evolves in unexpected ways. Inflation has obviously surprised to the upside over the past year, and further surprises could be in store. We therefore will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. And we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty to what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain time. We are highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee is determined to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. The American economy is very strong and well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.





2022.06.15
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference June 15, 2022 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. I will begin with one overarching message: We at the Fed understand the hardship that high inflation is causing. We are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down, and we're moving expeditiously to do so. We have both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price stability on behalf of American families and businesses. The economy and the country have been through a lot over the past two and a half years and have proved resilient. It is essential that we bring inflation down if we are to have a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. From the standpoint of our congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the current picture is plain to see: The labor market is extremely tight, and inflation is much too high. Against this backdrop, today the Federal Open Market Committee raised its policy interest rate by percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in that rate will be appropriate. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. I'll have more to say about today's monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. Overall economic activity edged down in the first quarter, as unusually sharp swings in inventories and net exports more than offset continued strong underlying demand. Recent indicators suggest that real GDP growth has picked up this quarter, with consumption spending remaining strong. In contrast, growth in business fixed investment appears to be slowing, and activity in the housing sector looks to be softening, in part reflecting higher mortgage rates. The tightening in financial conditions that we've seen in recent months should continue to temper growth and help bring demand into better balance with supply. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections, FOMC participants have marked down their projections for economic activity, with the median projection for real GDP growth running below 2 percent through 2024. The labor market has remained extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50 year low, job vacancies at historical highs, and wage growth elevated. Over the past three months, employment rose by an average of 408,000 jobs per month, down from the average pace seen earlier in the year but still robust. Improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor demand is very strong, while labor supply remains subdued, with the labor force participation rate little changed since January. FOMC participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance, easing the upward pressures on wages and prices. The median projection in the SEP for the unemployment rate rises somewhat over the next few years, moving from 3.7 percent at the end of this year to 4.1 percent in 2024, levels that are noticeably above the March projections. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in April, total PCE prices rose 6.3 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core prices rose 4.9 percent. In May, the 12-month change in the consumer price index came in above expectations at 8.6 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 6 percent. Aggregate demand is strong, supply constraints have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, and price pressures have spread to a broad range of goods and services. The surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from Russia's invasion of Ukraine is boosting prices for gasoline and food and is creating additional upward pressure on inflation. And COVID-related lockdowns in China are likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. FOMC participants have revised up their projections for inflation this year, particularly for total PCE inflation given developments in food and energy prices. The median projection is 5.2 percent this year and falls to 2.6 percent next year and 2.2 percent in 2024. Participants continue to see risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. The Fed's monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. Against the backdrop of the rapidly evolving economic environment, our policy has been adapting, and it will continue to do so. At today's meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by percentage point, resulting in a 1½ percentage point increase in the target range so far this year. The Committee reiterated that it anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet-which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. Coming out of our last meeting in May, there was a broad sense on the Committee that a ½ percentage point increase in the target range should be considered at this meeting if economic and financial conditions evolved in line with expectations. We also stated that we were highly attentive to inflation risks and that we would be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. Since then, inflation has again surprised to the upside, some indicators of inflation expectations have risen, and projections for inflation this year have been revised up notably. In response to these developments, the Committee decided that a larger increase in the target range was warranted at today's meeting. This continues our approach of expeditiously moving our policy rate up to more normal levels. And it will help ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. As shown in the SEP, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 3.4 percent at the end of this year, 1.5 percentage points higher than projected in March and 0.9 percentage point above the median estimate of its longer-run value. The median projection rises further to 3.8 percent at the end of next year and declines to 3.4 percent in 2024, still above the median longer-run value. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee plan or decision, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. Over coming months, we will be looking for compelling evidence that inflation is moving down, consistent with inflation returning to 2 percent. We anticipate that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate; the pace of those changes will continue to depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. Clearly, today's 75 basis point increase is an unusually large one, and I do not expect moves of this size to be common. From the perspective of today, either a 50 basis point or a 75 basis point increase seems most likely at our next meeting. We will, however, make our decisions meeting by meeting, and we will continue to communicate our thinking as clearly as we can. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Making appropriate monetary policy in this uncertain environment requires a recognition that the economy often evolves in unexpected ways. Inflation has obviously surprised to the upside over the past year, and further surprises could be in store. We therefore will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. And we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty in what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain time. We are highly attentive to inflation risks and determined to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. The American economy is very strong and well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you. And I look forward to your questions. 





2022.07.27
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference July 27, 2022 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down, and we're moving expeditiously to do so. We have both the tools we need and the resolve it will take to restore price stability on behalf of American families and businesses. The economy and the country have been through a lot over the past two and a half years and have proved resilient. It is essential that we bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal if we are to have a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. From the standpoint of our congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the current picture is plain to see: The labor market is extremely tight, and inflation is much too high. Against this backdrop, today the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by of a percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. And I'll have more to say about today's monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators of spending and production have softened. Growth in consumer spending has slowed significantly, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. Activity in the housing sector has weakened, in part reflecting higher mortgage rates. And after a strong increase in the first quarter, business fixed investment also looks to have declined in the second quarter. Despite these developments, the labor market has remained extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50-year low, job vacancies near historical highs, and wage growth elevated. Over the past three months, employment rose by an average of 375,000 jobs per month-down from the average pace seen earlier in the year, but still robust. Improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for African Americans and Hispanics. Labor demand is very strong, while labor supply remains subdued, with the labor force participation rate little changed since January. Overall, the continued strength of the labor market suggests that underlying aggregate demand remains solid. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in May, total PCE prices rose 6.3 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.7 percent. In June, the 12-month change in the consumer price index came in above expectations at 9.1 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 5.9 percent. Notwithstanding the recent slowdown in overall economic activity, aggregate demand appears to remain strong, supply constraints have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, and price pressures are evident across a broad range of goods and services. Although prices for some commodities have turned down recently, the earlier surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from Russia's war on Ukraine has boosted prices for gasoline and food, creating additional upward pressure on inflation. The Fed's monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today's meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by of a percentage point, bringing the target range to 2¼ to 2½ percent. And we're continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet, which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. Over coming months, we will be looking for compelling evidence that inflation is moving down, consistent with inflation returning to 2 percent. We anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate; the pace of those increases will continue to depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. Today's increase is the-in the target range is the second 75 basis point increase in as many meetings. While another unusually large increase could be appropriate at our next meeting, that is a decision that will depend on the data we get between now and then. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicating-and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. As the stance of monetary policy tightens further, it likely will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases while we assess how our cumulative policy adjustments are affecting the economy and inflation. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring demand into better balance with supply in order to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Making appropriate monetary policy in this uncertain environment requires a recognition that the economy often involves-evolves in unexpected ways. Inflation has obviously surprised to the upside over the past year, and further surprises could be in store. We therefore will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. And we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty in what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain time. We are highly attentive to inflation risks and determined to take the measures necessary to return inflation to our 2 percent longer-run goal. This process is likely to involve a period of below-trend economic growth and some softening in labor market conditions. But such outcomes are likely necessary to restore price stability and to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 





2022.09.21
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference September 21, 2022 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. We have both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price stability on behalf of American families and businesses. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Today the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by percentage point, and we anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate. We are moving our policy stance purposefully to a level that will be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. I will have more to say about today's monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy has slowed from the historically high growth rates of 2021, which reflected the reopening of the economy following the pandemic recession. Recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production. Growth in consumer spending has slowed from last year's rapid pace, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. Activity in the housing sector has weakened significantly, in large part reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment, while weaker economic growth abroad is restraining exports. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections, since June, FOMC participants have marked down their projections for economic activity, with the median projection for real GDP growth standing at just 0.2 percent this year and 1.2 percent next year, well below the median estimate of the longer-run normal growth rate. Despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market has remained extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50-year low, job vacancies near historical highs, and wage growth elevated. Job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 378,000 jobs per month over the last three months. The labor market continues to be out of balance, with demand for workers substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. The labor force participation rate showed a welcome uptick in August but is little changed since the beginning of the year. FOMC participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing the upward pressure on wages and prices. The median projection in the SEP for the unemployment rate rises to 4.4 percent at the end of next year, ½ percentage point higher than in the June projections. Over the next three years, the median unemployment rate runs above the median estimate of its longer-run normal level. Inflation remains well above our 2 percent longer-run goal. Over the 12 months ending in July, total PCE prices rose 6.3 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.6 percent. In August, the 12-month change in the consumer price index was 8.3 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 6.3 percent. Price pressures remain evident across a broad range of goods and services. Although gasoline prices have turned down in recent months, they remain well above year-earlier levels, in part reflecting Russia's war against Ukraine, which has boosted prices for energy and food and has created additional upward pressure on inflation. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 5.4 percent this year and falls to 2.8 percent next year, 2.3 percent in 2024, and 2 percent in 2025. Participants continue to see risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. Despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets. But that is not grounds for complacency; the longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. The Fed's monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today's meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by percentage point, bringing the target range to 3 to 3¼ percent. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet, which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. Over coming months, we will be looking for compelling evidence that inflation is moving down consistent with inflation returning to 2 percent. We anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate; the pace of those increases will continue to depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. With today's action, we have raised interest rates by 3 percentage points this year. At some point, as the stance of monetary policy tightens further, it will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases while we assess how our cumulative policy adjustments are affecting the economy and inflation. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. Restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive policy stance for some time. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. As shown in the SEP, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 4.4 percent at the end of this year, 1 percentage point higher than projected in June. The median projection rises to 4.6 percent at the end of next year and declines to 2.9 percent by the end of 2025, still above the median estimate of its longer-run value. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. We are taking forceful and rapid steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a sustained period of below-trend growth, and there will very likely be some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. We will keep at it until we are confident the job is done. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 





2022.11.02
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference November 2, 2022 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. My colleagues and I are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. We have both the tools that we need and the resolve it will take to restore price stability on behalf of American families and businesses. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Today, the FOMC raised our policy interest rate by 75 basis points. And we continue to anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate. We are moving our policy stance purposefully to a level that will be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. Restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive stance of policy for some time. I will have more to say about today's monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy has slowed significantly from last year's rapid pace. Real GDP rose at a pace of 2.6 percent last quarter but is unchanged so far this year. Recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production this quarter. Growth in consumer spending has slowed from last year's rapid pace, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. Activity in the housing sector has weakened significantly, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. Despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remains extremely tight, with the unemployment rate at a 50-year low, job vacancies still very high, and wage growth elevated. Job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 289,000 jobs per month over August and September. Although job vacancies have moved below their highs and the pace of job gains has slowed from earlier in the year, the labor market continues to be out of balance, with demand substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. The labor force participation rate is little changed since the beginning of the year. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in September, total PCE prices rose 6.2 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 5.1 percent. And the recent inflation data again have come in higher than expected. Price pressures remain evident across a broad range of goods and services. Russia's war against Ukraine has boosted prices for energy and food and has created additional upward pressure on inflation. Despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. But that is not grounds for complacency; the longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. The Fed's monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today's meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet, which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. With today's action, we have raised interest rates by 3 percentage points this year. We anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Financial conditions have tightened significantly in response to our policy actions, and we are seeing the effects on demand in the most interest-rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, such as housing. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. That's why we say in our statement that in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, we will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation. At some point-as I've said in the last two press conferences-it will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases as we approach the level of interest rates that will be sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal. There is significant uncertainty around that level of interest rates. Even so, we still have some ways to go, and incoming data since our last meeting suggest that the ultimate level of interest rates will be higher than previously expected. Our decisions will depend on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. We are taking forceful steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a sustained period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices in the longer run. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. We will stay the course until the job is done. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.





2022.12.14
December 14, 2022 Chair Powell's Press Conference FINAL Page 1 of 23 Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference December 14, 2022 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. Before I go into the details of today's meeting, I would like to underscore for the American people that we understand the hardship that high inflation is causing and that we are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Over the course of the year, we have taken forceful actions to tighten the stance of monetary policy. We have covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our rapid tightening so far are yet to be felt. Even so, we have more work to do. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy doesn't work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Today, the FOMC raised our policy interest rate by ½ percentage point. We continue to anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. Restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive policy stance for some time. I will have more to say about today's monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy has slowed significantly from last year's rapid pace. Although real GDP rose at a pace of 2.9 percent last quarter, it is roughly unchanged through the first three quarters of this year. Recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production this quarter. Growth in consumer spending has slowed from last year's rapid pace, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. Activity in the housing sector has weakened significantly, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and December 14, 2022 Chair Powell's Press Conference FINAL Page 2 of 23 slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. As shown in our Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection for real GDP growth stands at just 0.5 percent this year and next, well below the median estimate of the longer-run normal growth rate. Despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remains extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50-year low, job vacancies still very high, and wage growth elevated. Job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 272,000 jobs per month over the last three months. Although job vacancies have moved below their highs and the pace of job gains has slowed from earlier in the year, the labor market continues to be out of balance, with demand substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. The labor force participation rate is little changed since the beginning of the year. FOMC participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing upward pressures on wages and prices. The median projection in the SEP for the unemployment rate rises to 4.6 percent at the end of next year. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in October, total PCE prices rose 6 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 5 percent. In November, the 12-month change in the CPI was 7.1 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 6 percent. The inflation data received so far for October and November show a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of price increases. But it will take substantially more evidence to give confidence that inflation is on a sustained downward path. Price pressures remain evident across a broad range of goods and services. Russia's war against Ukraine has boosted prices for energy and food and has contributed to upward pressure on inflation. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is December 14, 2022 Chair Powell's Press Conference FINAL Page 3 of 23 5.6 percent this year and falls to 3.1 percent next year, 2.5 percent in 2024, and 2.1 percent in 2025; participants continue to see risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. Despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets. But that is not grounds for complacency; the longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. The Fed's monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today's meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ½ percentage point, bringing the target range to 4¼ to 4½ percent. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. With today's action, we have raised interest rates by 4¼ percentage points this year. We continue to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Over the course of the year, financial conditions have tightened significantly in response to our policy actions. Financial conditions fluctuate in the short term in response to many factors, but it is important that, over time, they reflect the policy restraint that we are putting in place to return inflation to 2 percent. We are seeing the effects on demand in December 14, 2022 Chair Powell's Press Conference FINAL Page 4 of 23 the most interest-sensitive sectors of the economy, such as housing. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. In light of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, the Committee decided to raise interest rates by 50 basis points today, a step-down from the 75 basis point pace seen over the previous four meetings. Of course, 50 basis points is still a historically large increase, and we still have some ways to go. As shown in the SEP, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 5.1 percent at the end of next year, ½ percentage point higher than projected in September. The median projection is 4.1 percent at the end of 2024 and 3.1 percent at the end of 2025, still above the median estimate of its longer-run value. Of course, these projections do not represent a Committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. Our decisions will depend on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. And we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. We are taking forceful steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a sustained period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. We will stay the course until the job is done. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the December 14, 2022 Chair Powell's Press Conference FINAL Page 5 of 23 Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you. I will look forward to your questions. 




 
2023.02.01
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference February 1, 2023 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, and welcome. My colleagues and I understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Over the past year, we have taken forceful actions to tighten the stance of monetary policy. We have covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our rapid tightening so far are yet to be felt. Even so, we have more work to do. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of labor market conditions that benefit all. Today, the FOMC raised our policy interest rate by 25 basis points. We continue to anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. In addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. Restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive stance for some time. I will have more to say about today's monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy slowed significantly last year, with real GDP rising at a below-trend pace of 1 percent. Recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production this quarter. Consumer spending appears to be expanding at a subdued pace, in part reflecting tighter financial conditions over the past year. Activity in the housing sector continues to weaken, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. Despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remains extremely tight, with the unemployment rate at a 50-year low, job vacancies still very high, and wage growth elevated. Job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 247,000 jobs per month over the last three months. Although the pace of job gains has slowed over the course of the past year and nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, the labor market continues to be out of balance. Labor demand substantially exceeds the supply of available workers, and the labor force participation rate has changed little from a year ago. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in December, total PCE prices rose 5.0 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.4 percent. The inflation data received over the past three months show a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of increases. And, while recent developments are encouraging, we will need substantially more evidence to be confident that inflation is on a sustained downward path. Despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. But that's not grounds for complacency. Although inflation has moderated recently, it remains too high. The longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. The Fed's monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today's meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points, bringing the target range to 4½ to 4 percent. And we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. With today's action, we have raised interest rates by 4½ percentage points over the past year. We continue to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. We are seeing the effects of our policy actions on demand in the most interest-sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. In light of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, the Committee decided to raise interest rates by 25 basis points today, continuing the step-down from last year's rapid pace of increases. Shifting to a slower pace will better allow the Committee to assess the economy's progress toward our goals as we determine the extent of future increases that will be required to attain a sufficiently restrictive stance. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, taking into account the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. We have been taking forceful steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. Our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. We will stay the course, until the job is done. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 





2023.03.22
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference May 3, 2023 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. Before discussing today's meeting, let me comment briefly on recent developments in the banking sector. Conditions in that sector have broadly improved since early March, and the U.S banking system is sound and resilient. We will continue to monitor conditions in the sector. We are committed to learning the right lessons from this episode and will work to prevent events like these from happening again. As a first step in that process, last week we released Vice Chair for Supervision Barr's Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank. The review's findings underscore the need to address our rules and supervisory practices to make for a stronger and more resilient banking system, and I am confident that we will do so. From the perspective of monetary policy, our focus remains squarely on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Today, the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by ¼ percentage point. Since early last year, we have raised interest rates by a total of 5 percentage points in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. We are also continuing to reduce our securities holdings. Looking ahead, we will take a data-dependent approach in determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate. I will have more to say about today's monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy slowed significantly last year, with real GDP rising at a below-trend pace of 0.9 percent. The pace of economic growth in the first quarter of this year continued to be modest, at 1.1 percent, despite a pickup in consumer spending. Activity in the housing sector remains weak, largely reflecting higher mortgage, mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. The labor market remains very tight. Over the first three months of the year, job gains averaged 345,000 jobs per month. The unemployment rate remained very low in March, at 3.5 percent. Even so, there are some signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming back into better balance. The labor force participation rate has moved up in recent months, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. Nominal wage growth has sown-shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. But overall, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in March, total PCE prices rose 4.2 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.6 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. Nonetheless, inflation pressures continue to run high, and the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. Despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The Fed's monetary policy actions are guided by, by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation pose-poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today's meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, bringing the target range to 5 to 5¼ percent. And we're continuing to [carry out] the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. With today's action, we have raised interest rates by 5 percentage points in a little more than a year. We are seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing and investment. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. In addition, the economy is likely to face further headwinds from tighter credit conditions. Credit conditions had already been tightening over the past year or so in response to our policy actions and a softer economic outlook. But the strains that emerged in the banking sector in early March appear to be resulting in even tighter credit conditions for households and businesses. In turn, these tighter credit conditions are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. The extent of these effects remains uncertain. In light of these uncertain headwinds, along with the monetary policy restraint we have put in place, our future policy actions will depend on how events unfold. In determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. We, we will make that determination meeting by meeting, based on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. And we are prepared to do more if greater monetary policy restraint is warranted. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 





2023.05.03
Transcript of Chair Powell's Press Conference May 3, 2023 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon. Before discussing today's meeting, let me comment briefly on recent developments in the banking sector. Conditions in that sector have broadly improved since early March, and the U.S banking system is sound and resilient. We will continue to monitor conditions in the sector. We are committed to learning the right lessons from this episode and will work to prevent events like these from happening again. As a first step in that process, last week we released Vice Chair for Supervision Barr's Review of the Federal Reserve's Supervision and Regulation of Silicon Valley Bank. The review's findings underscore the need to address our rules and supervisory practices to make for a stronger and more resilient banking system, and I am confident that we will do so. From the perspective of monetary policy, our focus remains squarely on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Today, the FOMC raised its policy interest rate by ¼ percentage point. Since early last year, we have raised interest rates by a total of 5 percentage points in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. We are also continuing to reduce our securities holdings. Looking ahead, we will take a data-dependent approach in determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate. I will have more to say about today's monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. The U.S. economy slowed significantly last year, with real GDP rising at a below-trend pace of 0.9 percent. The pace of economic growth in the first quarter of this year continued to be modest, at 1.1 percent, despite a pickup in consumer spending. Activity in the housing sector remains weak, largely reflecting higher mortgage, mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. The labor market remains very tight. Over the first three months of the year, job gains averaged 345,000 jobs per month. The unemployment rate remained very low in March, at 3.5 percent. Even so, there are some signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming back into better balance. The labor force participation rate has moved up in recent months, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. Nominal wage growth has sown-shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. But overall, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in March, total PCE prices rose 4.2 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.6 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. Nonetheless, inflation pressures continue to run high, and the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. Despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The Fed's monetary policy actions are guided by, by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation pose-poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today's meeting, the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, bringing the target range to 5 to 5¼ percent. And we're continuing to [carry out] the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. With today's action, we have raised interest rates by 5 percentage points in a little more than a year. We are seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing and investment. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. In addition, the economy is likely to face further headwinds from tighter credit conditions. Credit conditions had already been tightening over the past year or so in response to our policy actions and a softer economic outlook. But the strains that emerged in the banking sector in early March appear to be resulting in even tighter credit conditions for households and businesses. In turn, these tighter credit conditions are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. The extent of these effects remains uncertain. In light of these uncertain headwinds, along with the monetary policy restraint we have put in place, our future policy actions will depend on how events unfold. In determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. We, we will make that determination meeting by meeting, based on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. And we are prepared to do more if greater monetary policy restraint is warranted. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you. I look forward to your questions.





2023.06.14
good afternoon my colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people we understand the hardship that high inflation is causing and we remain strongly committed to Bringing inflation back down to our two percent goal price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve without price stability the economy doesn't work for anyone in particular without price stability we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all since early last year the fomc has significantly tightened The Stance of monetary policy we have raised our policy interest rate by five percentage points and we've continued to reduce our Securities Holdings at a Brisk pace we've covered a lot of ground and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt in light of how far we've come in tightening policy the uncertain lags with which monetary policy affects the economy and potential headwinds from credit tightening today we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our Securities Holdings looking ahead nearly all committee participants view it as likely that some further rate increases will be appropriate this year to bring inflation down to two percent over time and I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments the U.S economy slowed significantly last year and recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a modest pace although growth in consumer spending has picked up this year activity in the housing sector remains weak largely reflecting higher mortgage rates higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment committee participants generally expect to subdued growth to continue in our summary of economic projections the median projection has real GDP growth at 1.0 percent this year and 1.1 percent next year well below the median estimate of the longer run normal growth rate the labor market remains very tight over the past three months payroll job gains averaged a robust 283 000 jobs per month the unemployment rate moved up but remained low in May at 3.7 percent there are some signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming into better balance the labor force participation rate has moved up in recent months particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years nominal wage growth has shown signs of easing and job vacancies have declined so far this year while the jobs to workers Gap has declined labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers fomc participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time easing upward pressures on inflation the median unemployment rate projection in the SCP Rises to 4.1 percent at the end of this year and 4.5 percent at the end of next year inflation remains well above our longer run two percent goal over the 12 months ending in April total pce process Prices rose 4.4 percent excluding the volatile food and energy categories core piece core pce prices Rose 4.7 percent okay the 12-month change in the Consumer Price Index came in at four percent and the change in the core core CPI was 5.3 percent inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year nonetheless inflation pressures continue to run High and the process of getting inflation back down to two percent has a long way to go the median projection in the SCP for total pce inflation is 3.2 percent this year 2.5 percent next year and 2.1 percent in 2025. core pce inflation which excludes volatile and food and energy prices is projected to run higher than total inflation and the median projection has been revised in the SCP up to 3.9 percent this year despite elevated inflation longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households businesses and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets the fed's monetary policy actions are Guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and price and stable prices for the American people my colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes hardship as it erodes purchasing power especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of Essentials like food housing and transportation we are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our two percent objective as I noted earlier since early last year we have raised our policy rate by five percentage points we have been seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate sensitive sectors of the economy especially housing and investment it will take time however for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized especially on inflation the economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses which are likely to weigh on economic activity hiring and inflation the extent of these effects remains uncertain in light of how far we've come in tightening policy the uncertain lags with which monetary policy affects the economy and potential headwinds from credit tightening the committee decided at today's meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at five to five and a quarter percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our Securities Holdings as I noted earlier nearly nearly all committee participants expect that it will be appropriate to raise interest rates somewhat further by the end of the year but at this meeting considering how far and how fast we've moved we judged it prudent to hold the target range steady to allow the committee to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to two percent over time the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation and economic and financial developments in our SCP participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward if the economy evolves as projected the median participant projects at the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 5.6 percent at the end of this year 4.6 percent at the end of 2024 and 3.4 percent at the end of 2025. for the end of this year the median projection is a half percentage Point higher than in our March projections I hasten to add as always that these projections are not a committee decision or plan if the economy does not evolve as projected the path for policy will adjust as appropriate to Foster our maximum employment and price stability goals we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting based on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation as well as the balance of risks we remain committed to Bringing inflation bringing inflation back down to our two percent goal and to keeping longer term inflation expectations well anchored reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below Trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions for storing price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run to conclude we understand that our actions affect communities families and businesses across the country everything we do at the FED is in service to our public mission we will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals thank you and I look forward to your questions





2023.07.26
Good afternoon. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. We understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy doesn't work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Since early last year, the FOMC has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. Today, we took another step by raising our policy interest rate a quarter percentage point, and we are continuing to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. We have covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. Looking ahead, we will continue to take a data-dependent approach in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate. I'll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace. Growth in consumer spending appears to have slowed from earlier in the year. Although activity in the housing sector has picked up somewhat, it remains well below levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. And higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. The labor market remains very tight. Over the past three months, job gains averaged 244 thousand jobs per month, a pace below that seen earlier in the year but still a strong pace. The unemployment rate remains low, at 3.6 percent. There are some continuing signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming into better balance. The labor force participation rate has moved up since last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. Nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. While the jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in May, total PCE prices rose 3.8 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 4.6 percent. In June, the 12-month change in the Consumer Price Index, or CPI, came in at 3.0 percent, and the change in the core CPI was 4.8 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. Nonetheless, the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. Despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. The fed's monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. At today's meeting the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by a quarter percentage point, bringing the target range to 5 and 1/4 to 5 and 1/2 percent. We are also continuing the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. With today's action, we have raised our policy rate by 5 and 1/4 percentage points since early last year. We have been seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest-rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing and investment. It will take time, however, for the full effects of our ongoing monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. In addition, the economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. In determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation as well as the balance of risks. We remain committed to bringing inflation back to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 





2023.09.20
aTranscript of Chair Powell's Press Conference September 20, 2023 CHAIR POWELL. Good afternoon, everyone. My colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. We understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. Since early last year, the FOMC has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. We've raised our policy interest rate by 5¼ percentage points and have continued to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. We've covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. Today, we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. Looking ahead, we're in a position to proceed carefully in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate. Our decisions will be based on our ongoing assessments of the incoming data and the evolving outlook and risks. I will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a solid pace, and, so far this year, growth in real GDP has come in above expectations. Recent readings on consumer spending have been particularly robust. Activity in the housing sector has picked up somewhat, though it remains well below levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. In our Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, Committee participants revised up their assessments of real GDP growth, with the median for this year now at 2.1 percent. Participants expect growth to cool, with the median projection falling to 1.5 percent next year. The labor market remains tight, but supply and demand conditions continue to come into better balance. Over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged 150,000 jobs per month, a strong pace that is nevertheless well below that seen earlier in the year. The unemployment rate ticked up in August but remains low at 3.8 percent. The labor force participation rate has moved up since late last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. Nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. Although the jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. FOMC participants expect the rebalancing in the labor market to continue, easing upward pressures on inflation. The median unemployment rate projection in the SEP rises from 3.8 percent at the end of this year to 4.1 percent over the next two years. Inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Based on the consumer price index, or CPI, and other data, we estimate that total PCE prices rose 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in August and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 3.9 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year, and longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. Nevertheless, the progress-process of getting inflation sustainably down to 2 percent has a long way to go. The median projection in the SEP for total PCE inflation is 3.3 percent this year, falls to 2.5 percent next year, and reaches 2 percent in 2026. The Fed's monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. We are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we're strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. As I noted earlier, since early last year, we have raised our policy rate by 5¼ percentage points. We see the current stance of monetary policy as restrictive, putting downward pressure on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. In addition, the economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses. In light of how far we have come in tightening policy, the Committee decided at today's meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. We are committed to achieving and sustaining a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal over time. In our SEP, FOMC participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate, based on what each participant judges to be the most likely-sorry-the most likely scenario going forward. If the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 5.6 percent at the end of this year, 5.1 percent at the end of 2024, and 3.9 percent at the end of 2025. Compared with our June Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection is unrevised for the end of this year but has moved up by ½ percentage point at the end of the next two years. These projections, of course, are not a Committee decision or plan; if the economy does not evolve as projected, the path of policy will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. We will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks. Given how far we have come, we are in a position to proceed carefully as we assess the incoming data and the evolving outlook and risks. Real interest rates now are well above mainstream estimates of the neutral policy rate, but we are mindful of the inherent uncertainties in precisely gauging the stance of policy. We're prepared to raise rates further if appropriate, and we intend to hold policy at a restrictive level until we're confident that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our objective. In determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. We remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. Restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. To conclude: We understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We at the Fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.





2023.11.01
good afternoon everyone welcome my colleagues and I remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people we understand the hardship that high inflation is causing and we remain strongly committed to Bringing inflation back down to our 2% goal price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve without price stability the economy does not work for anyone in particular without price stability we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all since early last year the fomc has significantly tightened The Stance of monetary policy we have raised our policy interest rate by five and a quarter percentage points and have continued to reduce our Securities Holdings at a Brisk Pace The Stance of policy is restrictive meaning that tight policy is putting down downward pressure on economic activity and inflation and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt today we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our Securities Holdings given how far we have come along with the uncertainties and risks we Face the committee is proceeding carefully we will make decisions about the extent of additional policy firming and how long policy will remain restrictive based on the totality of the incoming data the evolving Outlook and the balance of risks I'll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a strong pace and well above earlier expectations in the third quarter real GDP is estimated to have risen an outsized annual rate of 4.9% boosted by a surge in consumer spending after picking up somewhat over the summer activity in the housing sector has flattened out and remains well below levels of a year ago largely reflecting higher mortgage rates higher interest rates also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment the labor market remains tight but supply and demand conditions continue to come into better balance over the past three months payroll job gains averaged 266,000 jobs per month a strong Pace that is nevertheless below that seen earlier in the year the unemployment rate remains low at 3.8% strong job creation has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers the labor force participation rate has moved up since late last year particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years and immigration has rebounded to prepandemic levels nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing and job V vacancies have declined so far this year although although the jobs to workers Gap has narrowed labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers inflation remains well above our longer run goal of 2% total pce Prices rose 3.4% over the 12 months ending in September excluding the volatile food and energy categories core pce Prices rose 3.7% inflation has moderated since the middle of last year and readings over the summer were quite favorable but a few months of good data are only the beginning of what it will take to build confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our goal the process of getting inflation sustainably down to 2% has a long way to go despite elevated inflation longer term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households businesses and and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets the fed's monetary policy actions are Guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the American people my colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of Essentials like food housing and transportation we are highly attentive to the risk that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2% objective as I noted earlier since early last year we have raised our policy rate by five and a quarter percentage points and we have decreased our Securities Holdings by more than $1 trillion our restrictive stance of monetary policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation the committee decided at today's meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 and A4 to 5 a half% and to continue the process of significantly reducing our Securities Holdings we are committed to achieving a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation sustainably down to 2% over time and to keeping po policy restrictive until we are confident that inflation is on a path to that objective we are attentive to recent data showing the resilience of economic growth and demand for labor evidence of growth persistently above potential or that tightness in the labor market is no longer easing could put further progress on inflation at risk and could warrant further tightening of monetary policy Financial conditions have tightened significantly in recent months driven by higher longer term bond yields among other factors because persistent changes in financial conditions can have implications for the path of monetary policy policy we monitor Financial developments closely in light of the uncertainties and risks and how far we have come the committee is proceeding carefully we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the Outlook and for economic activity and inflation as well as the balance of risks in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2% over time the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation and economic and financial developments we remain committed to Bringing inflation back down to our 2% goal and to keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below potential growth and some softening of labor market conditions restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run to conclude we understand that our actions affect communities families and businesses across the country everything we do is in service to our public Mission we at the FED will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals thank you and I look forward to your questions 






