Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee January 30–31, 2018 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, January 30, 2018, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, January 31, 2018, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Janet L. Yellen, Chair William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Lael Brainard Loretta J. Mester Jerome H. Powell Randal K. Quarles John C. Williams Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Michael Strine, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee David Reifschneider and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Mary Daly, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, Argia M. Sbordone, Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joseph W. Gruber, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Ellen E. Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, Edward Nelson, and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors William F. Bassett, Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. _Page 1 Andrew Figura, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jason Wu, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Dana L. Burnett and Michele Cavallo, Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Andrea Ajello, Kurt F. Lewis, and Bernd Schlusche, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Ekaterina Peneva and Daniel J. Vine, Principal Economists, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Camille Bryan, Lead Financial Analyst, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Ellen J. Bromagen, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Jeff Fuhrer and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Chicago, respectively Todd E. Clark,3 Evan F. Koenig, Keith Sill, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Dallas, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively Carlos Garriga and Jonathan L. Willis, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Kansas City, respectively Annual Organizational Matters4 In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that ad- vices of the election of the following members and alter- nate members of the Federal Open Market Committee for a term beginning January 30, 2018, had been received and that these individuals had executed their oaths of of- fice. The elected members and alternate members were as fol- lows: William C. Dudley, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with Michael Strine, First Vice Pres- ident of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as al- ternate Thomas I. Barkin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, with Eric Rosengren, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate Loretta J. Mester, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, with Charles L. Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate Raphael W. Bostic, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, with James Bullard, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate John C. Williams, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, with Esther L. George, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alternate By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Janet L. Yellen to serve as Chairman through February 2, 2018, and Jerome H. Powell to serve as Chairman, effective February 3, 2018, until the selection of his successor at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2019. By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Com- mittee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2019: Vice Chairman Secretary Deputy Secretary Assistant Secretary Assistant Secretary William C. Dudley James A. Clouse Matthew M. Luecke David W. Skidmore Michelle A. Smith Mark E. Van Der Weide General Counsel Michael Held Richard M. Ashton Steven B. Kamin Thomas Laubach David W. Wilcox Deputy General Counsel Assistant General Counsel Economist Economist Economist David Altig Kartik B. Athreya 3 Attended Tuesday session only. 4 Committee organizational documents are available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_authoriza- tions.htm. Page 2 _Federal Open Market Committee Thomas A. Connors Mary Daly David E. Lebow Trevor A. Reeve Argia M. Sbordone Ellis W. Tallman William Wascher Beth Anne Wilson Associate Economists By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account (SOMA). By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Simon Pot- ter and Lorie K. Logan to serve at the pleasure of the Committee as manager and deputy manager of the SOMA, respectively, on the understanding that these se- lections were subject to their being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Secretary’s note: Advice subsequently was re- ceived that the manager and deputy manager se- lections indicated above were satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations was approved with revisions to incorporate transactions of securities lending into the existing operational readiness testing provision and to improve the document’s readability. The Guidelines for the Conduct of System Open Market Operations in Federal-Agency Issues remained suspended. AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS (As amended effective January 30, 2018) OPEN MARKET TRANSACTIONS 1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com- mittee”) authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee to execute open market trans- actions (the “Selected Bank”), to the extent necessary to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted by the Committee: A. To buy or sell in the open market securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to prin- cipal and interest by, the United States, and securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the United States, that are eligible for purchase or sale under Sec- tion 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (“Eligible Secu- rities”) for the System Open Market Account (“SOMA”): i. As an outright operation with securities dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained at the Selected Bank: on a same-day or deferred de- livery basis (including such transactions as are com- monly referred to as dollar rolls and coupon swaps) at market prices; or ii. As a temporary operation: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis, to purchase such Eligible Se- curities subject to an agreement to resell (“repo transactions”) or to sell such Eligible Securities sub- ject to an agreement to repurchase (“reverse repo transactions”) for a term of 65 business days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise authorized by the Committee, are determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual counterparties; B. To allow Eligible Securities in the SOMA to ma- ture without replacement; C. To exchange, at market prices, in connection with a Treasury auction, maturing Eligible Securities in the SOMA with the Treasury, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct obligations of the United States or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States; and D. To exchange, at market prices, maturing Eligible Securities in the SOMA with an agency of the United States, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct obligations of that agency or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by that agency. SECURITIES LENDING 2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, the Committee authorizes the Se- lected Bank to operate a program to lend Eligible Secu- rities held in the SOMA to dealers on an overnight basis (except that the Selected Bank may lend Eligible Securi- ties for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions). A. Such securities lending must be: i. At rates determined by competitive bidding; ii. At a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives of the program; iii. Subject to reasonable limitations on the total amount of a specific issue of Eligible Securities that may be auctioned; and limitations on the iv. Subject to reasonable amount of Eligible Securities that each borrower may borrow. Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_ Page 3 B. The Selected Bank may: i. Reject bids that, as determined in its sole dis- cretion, could facilitate a bidder’s ability to control a single issue; ii. Accept Treasury securities or cash as collateral for any loan of securities authorized in this para- graph 2; and iii. Accept agency securities as collateral only for a loan of agency securities authorized in this para- graph 2. OPERATIONAL READINESS TESTING 3. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to undertake transactions of the type described in para- graphs 1 and 2 from time to time for the purpose of test- ing operational readiness, subject to the following limi- tations: A. All transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 shall be conducted with prior notice to the Commit- tee; B. The aggregate par value of the transactions au- thorized in this paragraph 3 that are of the type de- scribed in paragraph 1.A.i shall not exceed $5 billion per calendar year; and C. The outstanding amount of the transactions de- scribed in paragraphs 1.A.ii and 2 shall not exceed $5 billion at any given time. TRANSACTIONS WITH CUSTOMER ACCOUNTS 4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments or other authorized services for foreign central bank and international accounts main- tained at a Federal Reserve Bank (the “Foreign Ac- counts”) and accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States pursuant to sec- tion 15 of the Federal Reserve Act (together with the Foreign Accounts, the “Customer Accounts”), the Com- mittee authorizes the following when undertaken on terms comparable to those available in the open market: A. The Selected Bank, for the SOMA, to undertake reverse repo transactions in Eligible Securities held in the SOMA with the Customer Accounts for a term of 65 business days or less; and B. Any Federal Reserve Bank that maintains Cus- tomer Accounts, for any such Customer Account, when appropriate and subject to all other necessary authorization and approvals, to: i. Undertake repo transactions in Eligible Securi- ties with dealers with a corresponding reverse repo transaction in such Eligible Securities with the Cus- tomer Accounts; and ii. Undertake intra-day repo transactions in Eligi- ble Securities with Foreign Accounts. Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts un- der the provisions of this paragraph 4 may provide for a service fee when appropriate. Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts are also subject to the authori- zation or approval of other entities, including the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and, when involving accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States, the United States Department of the Treasury. ADDITIONAL MATTERS 5. The Committee authorizes the Chairman of the Committee, in fostering the Committee’s objectives dur- ing any period between meetings of the Committee, to instruct the Selected Bank to act on behalf of the Com- mittee to: A. Adjust somewhat in exceptional circumstances the stance of monetary policy and to take actions that may result in material changes in the composition and size of the assets in the SOMA; or B. Undertake transactions with respect to Eligible Securities in order to appropriately address temporary disruptions of an operational or highly unusual nature in U.S. dollar funding markets. Any such adjustment described in subparagraph A of this paragraph 5 shall be made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and decision about the stance of policy at its most recent meeting and the Committee’s long-run objectives to foster maximum employment and price stability, and shall be based on economic, financial, and monetary developments since the most recent meet- ing of the Committee. The Chairman, whenever feasi- ble, will consult with the Committee before making any instruction under this paragraph 5. The Committee voted unanimously to reaffirm without revision the Authorization for Foreign Currency Opera- tions and the Foreign Currency Directive as shown be- low. AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS (As reaffirmed effective January 30, 2018) IN GENERAL 1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com- mittee”) authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank selected by Page 4 _Federal Open Market Committee the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to execute open market transactions for the System Open Market Ac- count as provided in this Authorization, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee: A. To purchase and sell foreign currencies (also known as cable transfers) at home and abroad in the open market, including with the United States Treas- ury, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with other entities in the open market. This authorization to purchase and sell foreign currencies encompasses purchases and sales through standalone spot or forward transactions and through foreign exchange swap transactions. For purposes of this Authorization, foreign exchange swap transactions are: swap transactions with the United States Treasury (also known as warehousing transactions), swap transactions with other central banks under reciprocal currency arrangements, swap transactions with other central banks under standing dollar liquidity and foreign currency liquidity swap ar- rangements, and swap transactions with other entities in the open market. B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding for- ward contracts to receive or to deliver, foreign curren- cies. 2. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall, unless otherwise authorized by the Committee, be conducted: A. In a manner consistent with the obligations re- garding exchange arrangements under Article IV of the Articles of Agreement of the International Mone- tary Fund (IMF).1 B. In close and continuous cooperation and consul- tation, as appropriate, with the United States Treasury. C. In consultation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities, foreign central banks, and inter- national monetary institutions. D. At prevailing market rates. STANDALONE SPOT AND FORWARD TRANSACTIONS 3. For any operation that involves standalone spot or forward transactions in foreign currencies: A. Approval of such operation is required as fol- lows: i. The Committee must direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and for- ward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Authorization, exceeding $5 billion since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the Committee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”) must direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the opera- tion if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the Committee is not feasible in the time avail- able. ii. The Committee authorizes the Subcommittee to direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Au- thorization, totaling $5 billion or less since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the Commit- tee. B. Such an operation also shall be: i. Generally directed at countering disorderly market conditions; or ii. Undertaken to adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for currencies; or iii. Conducted for such other purposes as may be determined by the Committee. C. For purposes of this Authorization, the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregard- ing signs) of the dollar values of individual foreign cur- rencies purchased and sold, valued at the time of the transaction. WAREHOUSING 4. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank, with the prior approval of the Subcommittee and at the re- quest of the United States Treasury, to conduct swap transactions with the United States Exchange Stabiliza- tion Fund established by section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934 under agreements in which the Selected Bank purchases foreign currencies from the Exchange Stabilization Fund and the Exchange Stabilization Fund repurchases the foreign currencies from the Selected Bank at a later date (such purchases and sales also known as warehousing). RECIPROCAL CURRENCY ARRANGEMENTS, AND STANDING DOLLAR AND FOREIGN CURRENCY LIQUIDITY SWAPS 5. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements established under the North American Framework Agreement, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and stand- Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_ Page 5 ing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements as pro- vided in this Authorization and to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Com- mittee. A. For reciprocal currency arrangements all draw- ings must be approved in advance by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee be- lieves that consultation with the Committee is not fea- sible in the time available). B. For standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the Chairman. The Chairman may approve a schedule of potential drawings, and may delegate to the manager, System Open Market Account, the authority to ap- prove individual drawings that occur according to the schedule approved by the Chairman. C. For standing foreign currency liquidity swap ar- rangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the Committee is not feasible in the time available). D. Operations involving standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements and standing foreign currency li- quidity swap arrangements shall generally be directed at countering strains in financial markets in the United States or abroad, or reducing the risk that they could emerge, so as to mitigate their effects on economic and financial conditions in the United States. E. For reciprocal currency arrangements, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing for- eign currency liquidity swap arrangements: Any new arrangements must be approved by i. All arrangements are subject to annual review and approval by the Committee; ii. the Committee; and iii. Any changes in the terms of existing arrange- ments must be approved in advance by the Chair- man. The Chairman shall keep the Committee in- formed of any changes in terms, and the terms shall be consistent with principles discussed with and guidance provided by the Committee. OTHER OPERATIONS IN FOREIGN CURRENCIES 6. Any other operations in foreign currencies for which governance is not otherwise specified in this Au- thorization (such as foreign exchange swap transactions with private-sector counterparties) must be authorized and directed in advance by the Committee. FOREIGN CURRENCY HOLDINGS 7. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to hold foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac- count in accounts maintained at foreign central banks, the Bank for International Settlements, and such other foreign institutions as approved by the Board of Gover- nors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee. A. The Selected Bank shall manage all holdings of foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac- count: i. Primarily, to ensure sufficient liquidity to ena- ble the Selected Bank to conduct foreign currency operations as directed by the Committee; ii. safety; iii. Subject to paragraphs 7.A.i and 7.A.ii, to pro- vide the highest rate of return possible in each cur- rency; and iv. To achieve such other objectives as may be au- thorized by the Committee. Secondarily, to maintain a high degree of B. The Selected Bank may manage such foreign cur- rency holdings by: i. Purchasing and selling obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, a foreign government or agency thereof (“Permitted Foreign Securities”) through outright purchases and sales; ii. Purchasing Permitted Foreign Securities under agreements for repurchase of such Permitted For- eign Securities and selling such securities under agreements for the resale of such securities; and iii. Managing balances in various time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions approved by the Board of Governors under Regulation N. C. The Subcommittee, in consultation with the Committee, may provide additional instructions to the Selected Bank regarding holdings of foreign curren- cies. ADDITIONAL MATTERS 8. The Committee authorizes the Chairman: A. With the prior approval of the Committee, to en- ter into any needed agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the United States Treasury about the division of responsibility for foreign currency opera- tions between the System and the United States Treas- ury; Page 6 _Federal Open Market Committee B. To advise the Secretary of the United States Treasury concerning System foreign currency opera- tions, and to consult with the Secretary on policy mat- ters relating to foreign currency operations; C. To designate Federal Reserve System persons au- thorized to communicate with the United States Treasury concerning System Open Market Account foreign currency operations; and D. From time to time, to transmit appropriate re- ports and information to the National Advisory Coun- cil on International Monetary and Financial Policies. 9. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to undertake transactions of the type described in this Au- thorization, and foreign exchange and investment transactions that it may be otherwise authorized to undertake, from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness. The aggregate amount of such transactions shall not exceed $2.5 billion per calendar year. These transactions shall be conducted with prior notice to the Committee. 10. All Federal Reserve banks shall participate in the foreign currency operations for System Open Market Account in accordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Governors’ Statement of Procedure with Re- spect to Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944. 11. Any authority of the Subcommittee pursuant to this Authorization may be exercised by the Chairman if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Sub- committee is not feasible in the time available. The Chairman shall promptly report to the Subcommittee any action approved by the Chairman pursuant to this paragraph. 12. The Committee authorizes the Chairman, in excep- tional circumstances where it would not be feasible to convene the Committee, to foster the Committee’s ob- jectives by instructing the Selected Bank to engage in foreign currency operations not otherwise authorized pursuant to this Authorization. Any such action shall be made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and decisions regarding foreign currency operations. The Chairman, whenever feasible, will consult with the Com- mittee before making any instruction under this para- graph. __________________________ 1 In general, as specified in Article IV, each member of the IMF undertakes to collaborate with the IMF and other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates. These obligations include seeking to direct the member’s eco- nomic and financial policies toward the objective of fos- tering orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability. These obligations also include avoiding manip- ulating exchange rates or the international monetary sys- tem in such a way that would impede effective balance of payments adjustment or to give an unfair competitive advantage over other members. FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE (As reaffirmed effective January 30, 2018) 1. The Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to ex- ecute open market transactions, for the System Open Market Account, in accordance with the provisions of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations (the “Authorization”) and subject to the limits in this Di- rective. 2. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to exe- cute warehousing transactions, if so requested by the United States Treasury and if approved by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”), subject to the limitation that the outstanding balance of United States dollars provided to the United States Treasury as a result of these transactions not at any time exceed $5 billion. 3. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to main- tain, for the System Open Market Account: A. Reciprocal currency arrangements with the fol- lowing foreign central banks: Foreign central bank Maximum amount (millions of dollars or equivalent) Bank of Canada Bank of Mexico 2,000 3,000 Standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements with B. the following foreign central banks: Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank C. Standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrange- ments with the following foreign central banks: Bank of Canada Bank of England Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_ Page 7 Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank 4. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to hold and to invest foreign currencies in the portfolio in ac- cordance with the provisions of paragraph 7 of the Au- thorization. 5. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to report to the Committee, at each regular meeting of the Com- mittee, on transactions undertaken pursuant to para- graphs 1 and 6 of the Authorization. The Selected Bank is also directed to provide quarterly reports to the Com- mittee regarding the management of the foreign cur- rency holdings pursuant to paragraph 7 of the Authori- zation. 6. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to con- duct testing of transactions for the purpose of opera- tional readiness in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9 of the Authorization. By unanimous vote, the Committee revised its Program for Security of FOMC Information with a set of tech- nical changes to update references to other documents. In the Committee’s annual reconsideration of the State- ment on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strat- egy, participants agreed that only a minor revision was required at this meeting, which was to update the refer- ence to the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment from 4.8 percent to 4.6 percent. All participants supported the statement with the revision, and the Committee voted unanimously to approve the updated statement. STATEMENT ON LONGER-RUN GOALS AND MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY (As amended effective January 30, 2018) The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, sta- ble prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy deci- sions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncer- tainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and finan- cial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its as- sessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily de- termined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expendi- tures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persis- tently above or below this objective. Communicating this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of signifi- cant economic disturbances. The maximum level of em- ployment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor mar- ket. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; ra- ther, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncer- tain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unem- ployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For ex- ample, in the most recent projections, the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.6 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s as- sessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circum- stances in which the Committee judges that the objec- tives are not complementary, it follows a balanced ap- proach in promoting them, taking into account the mag- nitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. Page 8 _Federal Open Market Committee The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual or- ganizational meeting each January. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) provided a summary of developments in do- mestic and global financial markets over the intermeet- ing period. Financial conditions eased further over re- cent weeks with market participants pointing to increas- ing appetites for risk and perceptions of diminished downside risks as factors buoying market sentiment. In this environment, yields on safe assets such as U.S. Treasury securities moved up some while corporate risk spreads narrowed and equity prices recorded further sig- nificant gains. Breakeven measures of inflation compen- sation derived from Treasury Inflation Protected Securi- ties (TIPS) moved up but remained low. Survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations showed little change. Judging from interest rate futures, the ex- pected path of the federal funds rate shifted up over the period but continued to imply a gradual expected pace of policy firming. The deputy manager followed with a discussion of recent developments in money markets and FOMC operations. Year-end pressures were evi- dent in the market for foreign exchange basis swaps, but conditions returned to normal early in 2018. Yields on Treasury bills maturing in early March were elevated, re- flecting investors’ concerns about the possibility that a failure to raise the federal debt ceiling could affect the timing of principal payments for these securities. The Open Market Desk continued to execute reinvestment operations for Treasury and agency securities in the SOMA in accordance with the procedure specified in the Committee’s directive to the Desk. The deputy manager also reported on the volume of overnight reverse repur- chase agreement operations over the intermeeting pe- riod and discussed the Desk’s plans for small-value op- erational tests of various types of open market opera- tions over the coming year. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet- ing period. There were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the System’s account during the intermeeting period. Inflation Analysis and Forecasting The staff presented three briefings on inflation analysis and forecasting. The presentations reviewed a number of commonly used structural and reduced-form models. These included structural models in which the rate of inflation is linked importantly to measures of resource slack and a measure of expected inflation relevant for wage and price setting—so-called Phillips curve specifi- cations—as well as statistical models in which inflation is primarily determined by a time-varying inflation trend or longer-run inflation expectations. The briefings noted several factors beyond those captured in the mod- els that appeared to have put downward pressure on prices in recent years. These included structural changes in price setting for some items, such as medical care, and the effects of idiosyncratic price shocks, such as the un- usual drop in prices of wireless telephone services in 2017. The staff found little compelling evidence for the possible influence of other factors such as a more com- petitive pricing environment or a change in the markup of prices over unit labor costs. Overall, for the set of models presented, the prediction errors in recent years were larger than those observed during the 2001–07 pe- riod but were consistent with historical norms and, in most models, did not appear to be biased. The staff presentations considered two key channels by which monetary policy influences inflation—the re- sponse of inflation to changes in resource utilization and the role of inflation expectations, or trend inflation, in the price-setting process. In part because inflation was importantly influenced by a number of short-lived fac- tors, the effects of current and expected resource utiliza- tion gaps on inflation were not easy to discern empiri- cally. Estimates of the strength of those effects had di- minished noticeably in recent years. The briefings high- lighted a number of other challenges associated with es- timating the strength and timing of the linkage between resource utilization and inflation, including the reliability of and changes over time in estimates of the natural rate of unemployment and potential output and the ability to adequately account for supply shocks. In addition, some research suggested that the relationship between re- source utilization and inflation may be nonlinear, with the response of inflation increasing as rates of utilization rise to very high levels. With regard to inflation expectations, two of the brief- ings presented findings that the longer-run trend in in- flation, absent cyclical disturbances or transitory fluctu- ations, had been stable in recent years at a little below 2 percent. The briefings reported that the average fore- casting performance of models employing either statisti- cal estimates of inflation trends or survey-based measures of inflation expectations as proxies for infla- tion expectations appeared comparable, even though different versions of such models could yield very differ- Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_ Page 9 ent forecasts at any given point in time. Moreover, al- though survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations tended to move in parallel with estimated inflation trends, the empirical research provided no clear guidance on how to construct a measure of inflation ex- pectations that would be the most useful for inflation forecasting. The staff noted that although reduced-form models in which inflation tends to revert toward longer- run inflation trends described the data reasonably well, those models offered little guidance to policymakers on how to conduct policy so as to achieve their desired out- come for inflation. Following the staff presentations, participants discussed how the inflation frameworks reviewed in the briefings informed their views on inflation and monetary policy. Almost all participants who commented agreed that a Phillips curve–type of inflation framework remained useful as one of their tools for understanding inflation dynamics and informing their decisions on monetary policy. Policymakers pointed to a number of possible reasons for the difficulty in estimating the link between resource utilization and inflation in recent years. These reasons included an extended period of low and stable inflation in the United States and other advanced econ- omies during which the effects of resource utilization on inflation became harder to identify, the shortcomings of commonly used measures of resource gaps, the effects of transitory changes in relative prices, and structural factors that had made business pricing more competitive or prices more flexible over time. It was noted that re- search focusing on inflation across U.S. states or metro- politan areas continued to find a significant relationship between price or wage inflation and measures of re- source gaps. A couple of participants questioned the usefulness of a Phillips curve–type framework for poli- cymaking, citing the limited ability of such frameworks to capture the relationship between economic activity and inflation. Participants generally agreed that inflation expectations played a fundamental role in understanding and forecast- ing inflation, with stable inflation expectations providing an important anchor for the rate of inflation over the longer run. Participants acknowledged that the causes of movements in short- and longer-run inflation expec- tations, including the role of monetary policy, were im- perfectly understood. They commented that various proxies for inflation expectations—readings from household and business surveys or from economic fore- casters, estimates derived from market prices, or esti- mated trends—were imperfect measures of actual infla- tion expectations, which are unobservable. That said, participants emphasized the critical need for the FOMC to maintain a credible longer-run inflation objective and to clearly communicate the Committee’s commitment to achieving that objective. Several participants indicated that they viewed the available evidence as suggesting that longer-run inflation expectations remained well an- chored; one cited recent research finding that inflation expectations had become better anchored following the Committee’s adoption of a numerical inflation target. However, a few saw low levels of inflation over recent years as reflecting, in part, slippage in longer-run infla- tion expectations below the Committee’s 2 percent ob- jective. In that regard, a number of participants noted the importance of continuing to emphasize that the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective is symmetric. A couple of participants suggested that the Committee might consider expressing its objective as a range rather than a point estimate. A few other participants sug- gested that the FOMC could begin to examine whether adopting a monetary policy framework in which the Committee would strive to make up for past deviations of inflation from target might address the challenge of achieving and maintaining inflation expectations con- sistent with the Committee’s inflation objective, particu- larly in an environment in which the neutral rate of in- terest appeared likely to remain low. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the January 30–31 meet- ing indicated that labor market conditions continued to strengthen through December and that real gross do- mestic product (GDP) expanded at about a 2½ percent pace in the fourth quarter of last year. Growth of real final domestic purchases by households and businesses, generally a good indicator of the economy’s underlying momentum, was solid. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), remained below 2 percent Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expecta- tions were little changed on balance. in December. Total nonfarm payroll employment increased solidly in December, and the national unemployment rate re- mained at 4.1 percent. The unemployment rates for His- panics, for Asians, and for African Americans were lower than earlier in the year and close to the levels seen just before the most recent recession. The national labor force participation rate held steady in December; relative to the declining trend suggested by an aging population, this sideways movement in the participation rate repre- sented a further strengthening in labor market condi- tions. The participation rate for prime-age (defined as Page 10 _Federal Open Market Committee ages 25 to 54) men edged up in December, while the rate for prime-age women declined slightly. The share of workers who were employed part time for economic rea- sons was little changed in December and was close to its pre-recession level. The rates of private-sector job openings and quits were little changed in November, and the four-week moving average of initial claims for un- employment insurance benefits continued to be at a low level in mid-January. Recent readings showed that gains in hourly labor compensation remained modest. Both the employment cost index for private-sector workers and average hourly earnings for all employees rose about 2½ percent over the 12 months ending in December. Total industrial production increased over the two months ending in December, with broad-based gains in manufacturing, mining, and utilities output. Automak- ers’ schedules indicated that assemblies of light motor vehicles would likely move up over the coming months. Broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as the new orders indexes from national and regional man- ufacturing surveys, pointed to further solid increases in factory output in the near term. Real PCE increased strongly in the fourth quarter. Re- cent readings on key factors that influence consumer spending—including gains in employment, real disposa- ble personal income, and households’ net worth—con- tinued to be supportive of further solid growth of real PCE in the near term. Consumer sentiment in early Jan- uary, as measured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, remained upbeat. Real residential investment rose briskly in the fourth quarter after having declined in the previous two quar- ters. Both starts and issuance of building permits for new single-family homes increased in the fourth quarter as a whole, and starts for multifamily units also moved up. Moreover, sales of both new and existing homes rose in the fourth quarter. Real private expenditures for business equipment and in- tellectual property increased at a solid pace in the fourth quarter. Recent indicators of business equipment spend- ing—such as rising new orders of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft and upbeat readings on busi- ness sentiment from national and regional surveys— pointed to further gains in equipment spending in the near term. Firms’ real spending for nonresidential struc- tures rose modestly in the fourth quarter, as an increase in outlays for drilling and mining structures was largely offset by a decline in expenditures for other business structures. The number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to edge up through late January. Total real government purchases rose modestly in the fourth quarter. Increased federal government purchases mostly reflected a rise in defense spending, and the gains in purchases by state and local governments were led by an increase in construction spending in this sector. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened fur- ther in November after widening sharply in October. Exports of goods and services picked up in November, while imports, particularly of consumer goods, increased robustly. Available data for goods trade in December suggested that import growth again outpaced export growth. All told, real net exports were estimated to be a substantial drag on real GDP growth in the fourth quar- ter. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased about 1¾ percent over the 12 months ending in December. Core PCE price infla- tion, which excludes changes in consumer food and en- ergy prices, was 1½ percent over that same period. The consumer price index (CPI) rose around 2 percent over the same period, while core CPI inflation was 1¾ per- cent. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations—including those from the Michigan survey and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on balance. Incoming data suggested that economic activity abroad continued to expand at a solid pace and that this expan- sion was broad based across countries. In the advanced foreign economies (AFEs), real GDP in the euro area and the United Kingdom expanded at a moderate pace in the fourth quarter. In the emerging market economies (EMEs), Mexico’s economy rebounded after being held back by natural disasters in the third quarter. Economic growth remained solid in China but cooled off a bit in some emerging Asian economies after a very strong third-quarter performance. Inflation in both AFEs and EMEs picked up significantly in the fourth quarter, largely reflecting a boost from rising oil prices. Inflation excluding food and energy prices remained well below central bank targets in several economies, including the euro area and Japan. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Domestic financial market conditions eased considera- bly further over the intermeeting period. A strengthen- ing outlook for economic growth in the United States and abroad, along with recently enacted tax legislation, Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_ Page 11 appeared to boost investor sentiment. U.S. equity prices, Treasury yields, and market-based measures of inflation compensation rose, and spreads of yields on investment- and speculative-grade nonfinancial corporate bonds over those for comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed further. In addition, the dollar depreciated broadly amid strong foreign economic data and mone- tary policy communications by some foreign central banks that investors reportedly viewed as less accommo- dative than expected. FOMC communications over the intermeeting period were generally characterized by market participants as consistent with their expectations for continued gradual removal of monetary policy accommodation. The Com- mittee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at the December meeting was widely ex- pected, and the probability of an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate occurring at the January meeting, as implied by quotes on federal funds futures contracts, remained essentially zero. Over the inter- meeting period, the futures-implied probability of policy firming at the March meeting rose to about 85 percent; respondents to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants assigned, on average, similarly high odds to a rate increase at the March meet- ing. Levels of the federal funds rate at the end of 2018 and 2019 implied by overnight index swap rates moved up moderately. The nominal Treasury yield curve shifted up over the in- termeeting period amid an improved outlook for domes- tic and foreign economic growth. Yields on both 2- and 10-year Treasury securities moved up about 30 basis points. Measures of inflation compensation based on TIPS fell in response to the soft reading on core inflation in the November CPI release but subsequently moved up against the backdrop of an improving global growth outlook, higher commodity prices, depreciation of the dollar, and the stronger-than-expected reading on core inflation in the December CPI release. On net, inflation compensation moved up at both the 5-year and the 5-to-10-year horizons, and both measures returned to levels seen in early 2017 before the string of generally weaker-than-expected inflation readings. Broad equity price indexes rose substantially over the in- termeeting period, with investors pointing to a stronger global economic outlook and the supportive effect of the recently enacted tax legislation on risk sentiment. The VIX, an index of option-implied volatility for one- month returns on the S&P 500 index, increased but re- mained low by historical standards. Spreads of both in- vestment- and speculative-grade corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury yields declined slightly and remained well below their historical aver- ages. The FOMC’s decision at its December meeting to raise the target range for the federal funds rate was transmit- ted smoothly to money market rates. The effective fed- eral funds rate held steady at a level near the middle of the target range except at year-end. While borrowing costs moved up briefly in offshore dollar funding mar- kets over year-end, conditions in money markets were reported to be orderly. In line with recent year-end ex- periences, rates and volumes in the federal funds and Eurodollar markets declined, while in secured markets, rates on Treasury repurchase agreements increased. Af- ter year-end, pressures in money markets abated quickly and rates and volumes returned to recent ranges. The broad nominal dollar index declined nearly 4 per- cent relative to its value at the time of the December FOMC meeting; the decline was most pronounced against AFE currencies, but the dollar depreciated nota- bly against most EME currencies as well. EME equity prices registered substantial gains, in part supported by a significant rise in commodity prices; emerging market bond spreads narrowed moderately, and flows into EME equity and bond funds strengthened substantially. Market-based measures of policy expectations and longer-term sovereign yields moved up in most AFEs. The Bank of Canada raised its policy rate at its January meeting, largely in response to better-than-expected eco- nomic data. The Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, and the European Central Bank (ECB) left their mone- tary policy stances unchanged, as expected. Nonethe- less, the ECB president’s optimistic assessment of the euro-area economy at the press conference following the January meeting was interpreted by market participants as a signal that monetary policy would be less accommo- dative than expected. Following those remarks, the euro appreciated notably against the dollar and core euro-area sovereign yields moved higher. That said, market-based measures of policy expectations continued to indicate that investors anticipate a gradual pace of monetary pol- icy normalization in the euro area. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses and households remained generally accommodative over the intermeeting period and continued to be supportive of economic activity. Respondents to the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Prac- tices (SLOOS) reported easing standards and narrowing Page 12 _Federal Open Market Committee loan spreads for large and middle-market firms and at- tributed this easing to more aggressive competition from other bank or nonbank lenders. Net debt financing by investment-grade nonfinancial corporations turned neg- ative in December, but the weakness appeared to reflect a softening in the demand for credit, possibly related to the anticipation of higher after-tax cash flows and repa- triation of foreign earnings. In contrast, gross issuance of speculative-grade bonds and institutional leveraged loans remained strong. Credit market conditions for small businesses remained relatively accommodative de- spite sluggish credit growth among these firms. Credit conditions in municipal bond markets also remained ac- commodative. In commercial real estate (CRE) markets, growth of loans held by banks slowed further in the fourth quarter, though CRE loans held by small banks and some types of CRE loans held by large banks—construction and land development loans in particular—expanded at a more robust pace. Financing conditions in the commer- cial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) market re- mained accommodative as issuance continued at a ro- bust pace and spreads on CMBS remained near their lowest levels since the financial crisis. Credit conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommo- dative for most borrowers, though credit standards re- mained tight for borrowers with low credit scores or hard-to-document incomes. Mortgage rates increased in tandem with rates on longer-term Treasury securities but remained quite low by historical standards. Conditions in consumer credit markets remained largely supportive of economic activity. Consumer credit in- creased notably in November, exceeding the more mod- erate volume of borrowing observed earlier in the year. Revolving credit expanded in November, while nonre- volving credit grew robustly, mainly driven by expansion in student and other consumer loans. In contrast, growth of auto lending slowed in recent months, con- sistent with the weakening demand for such loans in the fourth quarter as reported in the January SLOOS. For subprime borrowers, conditions remained tight, particu- larly in the market for credit cards and auto loans. The staff provided its latest report on the potential risks to financial stability; the report continued to characterize the financial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as moderate on balance. This overall assessment incor- porated the staff’s judgment that vulnerabilities associ- ated with asset valuation pressures continued to be ele- vated; asset valuation pressures apparently reflected, in part, a broad-based appetite for risk among investors. The staff judged that vulnerabilities from leverage in the nonfinancial sector appeared to remain moderate, while vulnerabilities stemming from financial-sector leverage and from maturity and liquidity transformation contin- ued to be viewed as low. Staff Economic Outlook The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the January FOMC meeting was stronger than the staff forecast at the time of the December meeting. Real GDP was estimated to have risen in the fourth quarter of last year by somewhat more than the staff had previ- ously expected, as gains in both household and business spending were larger than anticipated. Beyond 2017, the forecast for real GDP growth was revised up, reflecting a reassessment of the recently enacted tax cuts, along with higher projected paths for equity prices and foreign economic growth and a lower assumed path for the for- eign exchange value of the dollar. Real GDP was pro- jected to increase at a somewhat faster pace than poten- tial output through 2020; the staff continued to assume that the recently enacted tax cuts would boost real GDP growth moderately over the medium term. The unem- ployment rate was projected to decline further over the next few years and to continue to run well below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate over this pe- riod. Estimates of total and core PCE price inflation for 2017 were in line with the staff’s previous forecast. The pro- jection for inflation over the medium term was revised up slightly, primarily reflecting tighter resource utiliza- tion in the January forecast. Total PCE price inflation in 2018 was projected to be somewhat faster than in 2017 despite a slower projected pace of increases in con- sumer energy prices; core PCE prices were forecast to rise notably faster in 2018, importantly reflecting both the expected waning of transitory factors that held down 12-month measures of inflation in 2017 as well as the projected further tightening in resource utilization. The staff projected that core inflation would reach 2 percent in 2019 and that total inflation would be at the Commit- tee’s 2 percent objective in 2020. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. On the one hand, many indicators of uncertainty about the macroeconomic outlook remained subdued; on the other hand, considerable uncertainty remained about a number of federal government policies relevant for the economic outlook. The staff saw the risks to the fore- casts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_ Page 13 as balanced. The risks to the projection for inflation also were seen as balanced. Downside risks included the pos- sibilities that longer-term inflation expectations may have edged lower or that the run of soft core inflation readings this year could prove to be more persistent than the staff expected. These downside risks were seen as essentially counterbalanced by the upside risk that infla- tion could increase more than expected in an economy that was projected to move further above its potential. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of the economic situation and the outlook, meeting participants agreed that information received since the FOMC met in December indicated that the labor market continued to strengthen and that economic activity expanded at a solid rate. Gains in em- ployment, household spending, and business fixed in- vestment were solid, and the unemployment rate stayed low. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy continued to run below 2 percent. Market-based measures of in- flation compensation increased in recent months but re- mained low; survey-based measures of longer-term in- flation expectations were little changed, on balance. Participants generally saw incoming information on eco- nomic activity and the labor market as consistent with continued above-trend economic growth and a further strengthening in labor market conditions, with the recent solid gains in household and business spending indicat- ing substantial underlying economic momentum. They pointed to accommodative financial conditions, the re- cently enacted tax legislation, and an improved global economic outlook as factors likely to support economic growth over coming quarters. Participants expected that with further gradual adjustments in the stance of mone- tary policy, economic activity would expand at a moder- ate pace and labor market conditions would remain strong. Near-term risks to the economic outlook ap- peared roughly balanced. Inflation on a 12-month basis was expected to move up this year and to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. However, participants judged that it was important to continue to monitor inflation develop- ments closely. Participants expected the recent solid growth in con- sumer spending to continue, supported by further gains in employment and income, increased household wealth resulting from higher asset prices, and high levels of con- sumer confidence. It was noted that spending on dura- ble goods to replace those damaged during the hurri- canes in September may have provided a temporary boost to consumer spending. In connection with solid growth in consumer spending, a couple of participants noted that the household saving rate had declined to its lowest level since 2005, likely driven by buoyant con- sumer sentiment or expectations that the rise in house- hold wealth would be sustained. Participants characterized their business contacts as gen- erally upbeat about the economy; their contacts cited the recent tax cuts and notable improvements in the global economic outlook as positive factors. Manufacturers in a number of Districts had responded to increased orders by boosting production. Against a backdrop of higher energy prices and increased global demand for crude oil, a couple of participants revised up their forecasts for en- ergy production in their respective Districts. Businesses in a number of Districts reported plans to further in- crease investment in coming quarters in order to expand capacity. Even so, several participants expressed con- siderable uncertainty about the degree to which changes to corporate taxes would support business investment and capacity expansion; according to these participants, firms may be only just beginning to determine how they might allocate their tax savings among investment, worker compensation, mergers and acquisitions, returns to shareholders, or other uses. The labor market had strengthened further in recent months, as indicated by continued solid payroll gains, a small increase in average hours worked, and a labor force participation rate that had held steady despite the longer- run declining trend implied by an aging population. Many participants reported that labor market conditions were tight in their Districts, evidenced by low unemploy- ment rates, difficulties for employers in filling open po- sitions or retaining workers, or some signs of upward pressure on wages. The unemployment rate, at 4.1 per- cent, had remained near the lowest level seen in the past 20 years. It was noted that other labor market indica- tors—such as the U-6 measure of unemployment or the share of involuntary part-time employment—had re- turned to their pre-recession levels. A few participants judged that while the labor market was close to full em- ployment, some margins of slack remained; these partic- ipants pointed to the employment-to-population ratio or the labor force participation rate for prime-age workers, which remained below pre-recession levels, as well as the absence to date of clear signs of a pickup in aggregate wage growth. Page 14 _Federal Open Market Committee During their discussion of labor market conditions, par- ticipants expressed a range of views about recent wage developments. While some participants heard more re- ports of wage pressures from their business contacts over the intermeeting period, participants generally noted few signs of a broad-based pickup in wage growth in available data. With regard to how firms might use part of their tax savings to boost compensation, a few participants suggested that such a boost could be in the form of onetime bonuses or variable pay rather than a permanent increase in wage structures. It was noted that the pace of wage gains might not increase appreciably if productivity growth remains low. That said, a number of participants judged that the continued tightening in labor markets was likely to translate into faster wage in- creases at some point. In their discussion of inflation developments, many par- ticipants noted that inflation data in recent months had generally pointed to a gradual rise in inflation, as the 12-month core PCE price inflation rose to 1.5 percent in December, up 0.2 percentage point from the low rec- orded in the summer. Meanwhile, total PCE price infla- tion was 1.7 percent over the same 12-month period. Participants anticipated that inflation would continue to gradually rise as resource utilization tightened further and as wage pressures became more apparent; several expected that declines in the foreign exchange value of the dollar in recent months would also likely help return inflation to 2 percent over the medium term. Business contacts in a few Districts reported that they had begun to have some more ability to raise prices to cover higher input costs. That said, a few participants posited that the recently enacted corporate tax cuts might lead firms to cut prices in order to remain competitive or to gain mar- ket share, which could result in a transitory drag on in- flation. With regard to inflation expectations, available readings from surveys had been steady and TIPS-based measures of inflation compensation had moved up, although they remained low. Many participants thought that inflation expectations remained well anchored and would support the gradual return of inflation to the Committee’s 2 per- cent objective over the medium term. However, a few other participants pointed to the record of inflation con- sistently running below the Committee’s 2 percent ob- jective over recent years and expressed the concern that longer-run inflation expectations may have slipped be- low levels consistent with that objective. Many participants noted that financial conditions had eased significantly over the intermeeting period; these participants generally viewed the economic effects of the decline in the dollar and the rise in equity prices as more than offsetting the effects of the increase in nominal Treasury yields. One participant reported that financial market contacts did not see the relatively flat slope of the yield curve as signaling an increased risk of recession. A few others judged that it would be important to continue to monitor the effects of policy firming on the slope of the yield curve, noting the strong association between past yield curve inversions and recessions. Regulatory actions and improved risk management in re- cent years had put the financial system in a better posi- tion to withstand adverse shocks, such as a substantial decline in asset prices, than in the past. However, amid elevated asset valuations and an increased use of debt by nonfinancial corporations, several participants cautioned that imbalances in financial markets may begin to emerge as the economy continued to operate above po- tential. In this environment, increased use of leverage by nonbank financial institutions might be difficult to detect in a timely manner. It was also noted that the Committee should regularly reassess risks to the finan- cial system and their implications for the economic out- look in light of the potential for changes in regulatory policies over time. In their consideration of monetary policy, participants discussed the implications of recent economic and finan- cial developments for the outlook for economic growth, labor market conditions, and inflation and, in turn, for the appropriate path of the federal funds rate. Partici- pants agreed that a gradual approach to raising the target range for the federal funds rate remained appropriate and reaffirmed that adjustments to the policy path would depend on their assessments of how the economic out- look and risks to the outlook were evolving relative to the Committee’s policy objectives. While participants continued to expect economic activity to expand at a moderate pace over the medium term, they anticipated that the rate of economic growth in 2018 would exceed their estimates of its sustainable longer-run pace and that labor market conditions would strengthen further. A number of participants indicated that they had marked up their forecasts for economic growth in the near term relative to those made for the December meeting in light of the strength of recent data on economic activity in the United States and abroad, continued accommodative fi- nancial conditions, and information suggesting that the effects of recently enacted tax changes—while still un- certain—might be somewhat larger in the near term than previously thought. Several others suggested that the Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_ Page 15 upside risks to the near-term outlook for economic ac- tivity may have increased. A majority of participants noted that a stronger outlook for economic growth raised the likelihood that further gradual policy firming would be appropriate. Almost all participants continued to anticipate that infla- tion would move up to the Committee’s 2 percent ob- jective over the medium term as economic growth re- mained above trend and the labor market stayed strong; several commented that recent developments had in- creased their confidence in the outlook for further pro- gress toward the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objec- tive. A couple noted that a step-up in the pace of eco- nomic growth could tighten labor market conditions even more than they currently anticipated, posing risks to inflation and financial stability associated with sub- stantially overshooting full employment. However, some participants saw an appreciable risk that inflation would continue to fall short of the Committee’s objec- tive. These participants saw little solid evidence that the strength of economic activity and the labor market was showing through to significant wage or inflation pres- sures. They judged that the Committee could afford to be patient in deciding whether to increase the target range for the federal funds rate in order to support fur- ther strengthening of the labor market and allow partic- ipants to assess whether incoming information on infla- tion showed that it was solidly on a track toward the Committee’s objective. Some participants also commented on the likely evolu- tion of the neutral federal funds rate. By most estimates, the neutral level of the federal funds rate had been very low in recent years, but it was expected to rise slowly over time toward its longer-run level. However, the out- look for the neutral rate was uncertain and would de- pend on the interplay of a number of forces. For exam- ple, the neutral rate, which appeared to have fallen sharply during the Global Financial Crisis when financial headwinds had restrained demand, might move up more than anticipated as the global economy strengthened. Alternatively, the longer-run level of the neutral rate might remain low in the absence of fundamental shifts in trends in productivity, demographics, or the demand for safe assets. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the Committee met in December indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a solid rate. Gains in employ- ment, household spending, and business fixed invest- ment had been solid, and the unemployment rate had stayed low. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy had continued to run below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation had increased in re- cent months but remained low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed, on balance. Members expected that, with further gradual adjust- ments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activ- ity would expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions would remain strong. In their discussion of the economic outlook, most members viewed the recent data bearing on real economic activity as suggesting a modestly stronger near-term outlook than they had an- ticipated at their meeting in December. In addition, fi- nancial conditions had remained accommodative, and the details of the tax legislation suggested that its effects on consumer and business spending—while still uncer- tain—might be a bit greater in the near term than they had previously thought. Although several saw increased upside risks to the near-term outlook for economic ac- tivity, members generally continued to judge the risks to that outlook as remaining roughly balanced. Most members noted that recent information on infla- tion along with prospects for a continued solid pace of economic activity provided support for the view that in- flation on a 12-month basis would likely move up in 2018 and stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent ob- jective over the medium term. However, a couple of members expressed concern about the outlook for infla- tion, seeing little evidence of a meaningful improvement in the underlying trend in inflation, measures of inflation expectations, or wage growth. Several members com- mented that they saw both upside and downside risks to the inflation outlook, and members agreed to continue to monitor inflation developments closely. After assessing current conditions and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- bers voted to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1¼ to 1½ percent. They indicated that the stance of monetary policy remained accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate would depend on their assessments of realized and ex- pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s Page 16 _Federal Open Market Committee objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in- flation. They reiterated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of infla- tion pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Members also agreed to carefully monitor actual and expected in- flation developments relative to the Committee’s sym- metric inflation goal. Members expected that economic conditions would evolve in a manner that would warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate. They judged that a gradual approach to raising the target range would sustain the economic expansion and balance the risks to the outlook for inflation and unemployment. Members agreed that the strengthening in the near-term economic outlook increased the likelihood that a gradual upward trajectory of the federal funds rate would be ap- propriate. They therefore agreed to update the charac- terization of their expectation for the evolution of the federal funds rate in the postmeeting statement to point to “further gradual increases” while maintaining the tar- get range at the current meeting. Members continued to anticipate that the federal funds rate would likely remain, for some time, below levels that were expected to prevail in the longer run. Nonetheless, they again stated that the actual path for the federal funds rate would depend on the economic outlook as informed by the incoming data. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective February 1, 2018, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1¼ to 1½ percent, including overnight re- verse repurchase operations (and reverse repur- chase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate week- end, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 1.25 percent, in amounts lim- ited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each cal- endar month that exceeds $12 billion, and to re- invest in agency mortgage-backed securities the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during each calendar month that exceeds $8 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a solid rate. Gains in employment, household spending, and business fixed invest- ment have been solid, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have continued to run be- low 2 percent. Market-based measures of infla- tion compensation have increased in recent months but remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with further gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will ex- pand at a moderate pace and labor market con- ditions will remain strong. Inflation on a month basis is expected to move up this year 12 and to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 per- cent objective over the medium term. Near- term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but the Committee is moni- toring inflation developments closely. ‑ In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee de- cided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1¼ to 1½ percent. The stance of remains accommodative, monetary policy Minutes of the Meeting of January 30–31, 2018_ Page 17 thereby supporting strong labor market condi- tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla- tion. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 per- cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac- count a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international de- velopments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation develop- ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic condi- tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.” Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C. Dudley, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael Brainard, Loretta J. Mester, Jerome H. Powell, Randal K. Quarles, and John C. Williams. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un- changed at 1½ percent and voted unanimously to ap- prove establishment of the primary credit rate (discount rate) at the existing level of 2 percent.5 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, March 20–21, 2018. The meeting adjourned at 10:50 a.m. on Janu- ary 31, 2018. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on January 2, 2018, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 12–13, 2017. _____________________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 5 The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates. Page 18 _Federal Open Market Committee 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee March 20–21, 2018 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 20, 2018, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, March 21, 2018, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Lael Brainard Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles John C. Williams James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine,2 Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Thomas Laubach, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts,2 Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed, Brian M. Doyle, and Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Eric M. Engen and Diana Hancock, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Ellen E. Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, Edward Nelson, and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Stacey Tevlin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Glenn Follette and Karen M. Pence,2 Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended Tuesday session only. 3 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Eric C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, and Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Etienne Gagnon, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Kurt F. Lewis, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Anna Orlik, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Valerie Hinojosa, Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Meredith Black, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Michael Dotsey, Glenn D. Rudebusch, and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, San Francisco, and Chicago, respectively Marc Giannoni, Luke Woodward, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Kansas City, and Minneapolis, respectively David Andolfatto, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni Olivei, and Jonathan L. Willis, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, New York, Boston, and Kansas City, respectively Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The deputy manager of the System Open Market Ac- count (SOMA) provided a summary of developments in domestic and global financial markets over the inter- meeting period; she also reported on open market oper- ations and related issues. Financial markets experienced a notable bout of volatility early in the intermeeting pe- riod; volatility was particularly pronounced in equity markets. Market participants pointed to incoming eco- nomic data released in early February—particularly data on average hourly earnings—as raising concerns about the prospects for higher inflation and higher interest rates. These concerns reportedly contributed to a steep decline in equity prices and an associated rise in measures of volatility. Some reports suggested that the increase in volatility was amplified by the unwinding of trading positions based on various types of volatility trading strategies. Measures of equity market volatility declined over subsequent weeks but remained above lev- els that prevailed earlier in the year, and stock prices fin- ished lower, on net, over the intermeeting period. Inter- est rates rose modestly over the period. Respondents to the Open Market Desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants suggested that revisions in investors’ views regarding the fiscal outlook were an important fac- tor boosting yields and contributing to a slightly steeper expected trajectory of the federal funds rate. The deputy manager noted that a rapid and sizable increase in Treas- ury bill issuance over recent weeks had put upward pres- sure on money market yields over the period. Three- month Treasury bill yields moved up significantly and those increases passed through to rates on other short- term instruments such as three-month Eurodollar de- posits and commercial paper. The spread of market rates on overnight repurchase agreements over the of- fering rate at the Federal Reserve’s overnight reverse re- purchase (ON RRP) facility widened, and take-up at the facility fell to quite low levels as a result. Rates on over- night federal funds and Eurodollar transactions edged higher relative to the interest rate on excess reserves. The Desk continued to execute the FOMC’s balance sheet normalization plan initiated in October of last year. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open the Market Desk’s domestic intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the System’s account during the intermeeting period. transactions over Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the March 20–21 meeting indicated that labor market conditions continued to strengthen through February and suggested that real gross domestic product (GDP) was rising at a moderate pace in the first quarter. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures January. (PCE), Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expecta- tions were little changed on balance. remained below 2 percent in Gains in total nonfarm payroll employment were strong over the two months ending in February. The labor force participation rate held steady in January and then stepped up markedly in February, with the participation Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ rates for prime-age (defined as ages 25 to 54) women and men moving up on net. The national unemployment rate remained at 4.1 percent. Similarly, the unemploy- ment rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics were roughly flat, on balance, in recent months. The share of workers employed part time for economic rea- sons edged up but remained close to its pre-recession levels. The rates of private-sector job openings and quits increased slightly, on net, over the two months ending in January, and the four-week moving average of initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits continued to be low in early March. Recent readings showed that increases in labor compensation remained modest. Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector advanced 2¾ percent over the four quarters of last year, and average hourly earnings for all employees rose 2½ percent over the 12 months ending in February. Total industrial production expanded, on net, in January and February, with gains in both manufacturing and mining. Automakers’ schedules indicated that assem- blies of light motor vehicles would likely edge down in coming months. However, broader indicators of manu- facturing production, such as the new orders indexes from national and regional manufacturing surveys, pointed to further solid increases in factory output in the near term. Consumer expenditures appeared likely to rise at a mod- est pace in the first quarter following a strong gain in the preceding quarter. Real PCE edged down in January, and the components of the nominal retail sales data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its es- timate of PCE rose somewhat in February while the pace of light motor vehicle sales declined slightly. However, household spending was probably held back somewhat in February because of a delay in many federal tax re- funds, and the subsequent delivery of those refunds would likely contribute to an increase in consumer spending in March. Moreover, the lower tax withhold- ing resulting from the tax cuts enacted late last year, which was beginning to show through in consumers’ paychecks, would likely provide some impetus to spend- ing in coming months. More broadly, recent readings on key factors that influence consumer spending—in- cluding gains in employment and real disposable per- sonal income, along with households’ elevated net worth—continued to be supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. In addition, consumer senti- ment in early March, as measured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, was at its highest level since 2004. Real residential investment looked to be slowing in the first quarter after rising briskly in the fourth quarter. Starts of new single-family homes increased in January and February, although building permit issuance moved down somewhat. Starts of multifamily units jumped in January but fell back in February. Sales of both new and existing homes declined in January. Growth in real private expenditures for business equip- ment and intellectual property appeared to be moderat- ing in the first quarter after increasing at a solid pace in the preceding quarter. Nominal shipments of nonde- fense capital goods excluding aircraft edged down in Jan- uary. However, recent forward-looking indicators of business equipment spending—such as the backlog of unfilled capital goods orders, along with upbeat readings on business sentiment from national and regional sur- veys—pointed to further solid gains in equipment spending in the near term. Firms’ nominal spending for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and min- ing sector declined in January. In contrast, the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indica- tor of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to move up through mid- March. Total real government purchases seemed to be flattening out, on balance, in the first quarter after rising solidly in the fourth quarter. Nominal defense spending in Janu- ary and February was consistent with a decline in real federal purchases. In contrast, real purchases by state and local governments looked to be rising, as the pay- rolls of these governments increased in January and Feb- ruary and nominal state and local construction spending advanced somewhat in January. The change in net exports was a significant drag on real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2017, as imports grew rapidly. The nominal U.S. international trade defi- cit widened in January; exports declined, led by lower ex- ports of capital goods and industrial supplies, while im- ports were about flat. The slowing of real import growth following the rapid increase in the fourth quarter sug- gested that the drag on real GDP growth from net ex- ports would lessen in the first quarter. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1¾ percent over the 12 months ending in January. Core PCE price inflation, which ex- cludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1½ percent over that same period. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2¼ percent over the 12 months ending in February, while core CPI inflation was 1¾ percent. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run Minutes of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ inflation expectations—including those from the Michi- gan survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on balance. Foreign economic activity expanded at a moderate pace in the fourth quarter. Real GDP growth picked up in Mexico but slowed a bit in some advanced foreign econ- omies (AFEs) and in emerging Asia. Recent indicators pointed to solid economic growth abroad in the first quarter of this year. Inflation abroad continued to be boosted by the pass-through to consumer prices of past increases in oil prices. However, excluding food and en- ergy prices, inflation remained subdued in many foreign economies, including the euro area and Japan. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Financial markets were turbulent over the intermeeting period, and market volatility increased notably. On net, U.S. equity prices declined, corporate bond spreads wid- ened, and nominal Treasury yields rose. Broad equity price indexes decreased over the intermeet- ing period. Market participants pointed to a larger-than- expected increase in average hourly earnings in the Jan- uary employment report as a factor triggering increased investor concerns about inflation and the associated pace of interest rate increases. Those concerns appeared to induce a substantial decline in equity prices. The de- cline may have been exacerbated by broader concerns about the level of stock market valuations. On Febru- ary 5, the VIX—an index of option-implied volatility for one-month returns on the S&P 500 index—rose to its highest level since 2015, reportedly driven in part by the unwinding of investment strategies designed to profit from low volatility. Subsequently, equity prices recov- ered about half of their decline, and the VIX partially retraced its earlier increase. Monetary policy communications over the intermeeting period—including the January FOMC statement, the minutes of the January FOMC meeting, and the Chair- man’s semiannual testimony to the Congress—were generally viewed by market participants as signaling a somewhat stronger economic outlook and thus rein- forced expectations for further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate. The probability of the next rate hike occurring at the March FOMC meeting, as implied by quotes on federal funds futures contracts, increased to near certainty. Conditional on a March rate hike, the market-implied probability of an- other increase in the federal funds rate target range at the June FOMC meeting edged up to just above 70 percent. Expectations for the federal funds rate at the end of 2019 and 2020, derived from overnight index swap (OIS) quotes, moved up somewhat since late January. On net, the nominal Treasury yield curve shifted up and flattened a bit. Monetary policy communications, higher-than-expected domestic price data, and expecta- tions for increases in the supply of Treasury securities following the federal budget agreement in early February contributed to the increase in Treasury yields. Measures inflation compensation derived from Treasury of Inflation-Protected Securities were little changed on net. Option-implied volatility on longer-term rates rose no- tably following the jump in equity market volatility on February 5 but mostly retraced that increase by the end of the intermeeting period. On balance, spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury yields widened but remained near the lower end of their historical ranges. In short-term funding markets, increased issuance of Treasury bills lifted Treasury bill yields above comparable-maturity OIS rates for the first time in al- most a decade. The rise in bill yields was a factor that pushed up money market rates and widened the spreads of certificates of deposit and term London interbank of- fered rates relative to OIS rates. The upward pressure on money market rates also showed up in slight increases in the effective federal funds rate and the overnight bank funding rate relative to the interest rate on excess re- serves. The rise in market rates on overnight repurchase agreements relative to the offering rate on the Federal Reserve’s ON RRP facility resulted in low levels of take- up at the facility. Reductions in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet continued as scheduled without a notable effect on markets. Despite the recent volatility in some financial markets, financing conditions for nonfinancial corporations and households remained accommodative over the inter- meeting period and continued to support further expan- sion of economic activity. Gross issuance of invest- ment- and speculative-grade bonds was slightly lower than usual in January and February, while gross issuance of institutional leveraged loans stayed strong. The pro- vision of bank-intermediated credit to businesses slowed further, likely reflecting weak loan demand rather than tight supply. Small business owners continued to report accommodative credit supply conditions but also weak demand for credit. Credit conditions in municipal bond markets remained accommodative. In commercial real estate markets, loan growth at banks slowed further in January and February. Financing con- ditions in commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) markets remained accommodative, as issuance Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ was robust (relative to the usual seasonal slowdown) and CMBS spreads continued to be at low levels. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative for most borrowers, though credit con- ditions stayed tight for borrowers with low credit scores or with hard-to-document incomes. Mortgage rates moved up, on net, over the period, along with the rise in other long-term rates. Consumer credit grew at a solid pace in January follow- ing a rapid expansion in the fourth quarter. Aggregate credit card balances continued to expand steadily in Jan- uary. Nonetheless, for subprime borrowers, conditions remained tight, with credit limits and balances still low by historical standards. Auto lending continued to grow at a moderate pace in recent months; although under- writing standards in the subprime segment continued to tighten, there were few signs of a significant restriction in credit supply for auto loans. Since the January FOMC meeting, foreign equity prices moved notably lower, on net, and generally declined more in the AFEs than in the United States. Longer- term yields on sovereign debt in AFEs either decreased moderately or ended the period little changed, in con- trast to the increase in U.S. Treasury yields. Weaker- than-expected economic data weighed on market-based measures of expected policy rate paths and on longer- term yields in Canada and in the euro area. Communi- cations from the Bank of Canada also seemed to con- tribute to the decline in Canadian yields. In the United Kingdom, longer-term yields were little changed, on net, although the market-based path of expected policy rates moved up moderately in response to Bank of England communications. In emerging market economies (EMEs), sovereign yield spreads widened modestly, and flows into EME mutual funds were volatile over the pe- riod. The broad nominal dollar index appreciated moderately over the period, largely reflecting an outsized deprecia- tion of the Canadian dollar and a massive devaluation of the Venezuelan bolivar. (The Venezuelan government devalued the official Venezuelan exchange rate by more than 99 percent against the dollar, bringing the official rate closer to its black market value.) Lower oil prices, weaker-than-expected economic data, and uncertainty over U.S. trade policy likely contributed to the weakness in the Canadian dollar. In contrast, the Japanese yen ap- preciated against the dollar, in part supported by safe- haven demand. Late in the intermeeting period, the Brit- ish pound was boosted by news of a preliminary agree- ment between U.K. and European Union authorities re- garding the transition period of the Brexit process, but the pound still ended the intermeeting period modestly weaker against the dollar. Staff Economic Outlook The staff projection for U.S. economic activity prepared for the March FOMC meeting was somewhat stronger, on balance, than the forecast at the time of the January meeting. The near-term forecast for real GDP growth was revised down a little; the incoming spending data were a bit softer than the staff had expected, and the staff judged that the softness was not associated with re- sidual seasonality in the data. However, the slowing in the pace of spending in the first quarter was expected to be transitory, and the medium-term projection for GDP growth was revised up modestly, largely reflecting the expected boost to GDP from the federal budget agree- ment enacted in February. Real GDP was projected to increase at a faster pace than potential output through 2020. The unemployment rate was projected to decline further over the next few years and to continue to run below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate over this period. The projection for inflation over the medium term was revised up a bit, reflecting the slightly tighter resource utilization in the new forecast. The rates of both total and core PCE price inflation were projected to be faster in 2018 than in 2017. The staff projected that inflation would reach the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2019. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the upside, recent fiscal policy changes could lead to a greater ex- pansion in economic activity over the next few years than the staff projected. On the downside, those fiscal policy changes could yield less impetus to the economy than the staff expected if the economy was already op- erating above its potential level and resource utilization continued to tighten, as the staff projected. Risks to the inflation projection also were seen as balanced. An up- side risk was that inflation could increase more than ex- pected in an economy that was projected to move fur- ther above its potential. Downside risks included the possibilities that longer-term inflation expectations may have edged lower or that the run of low core inflation readings last year could prove to be more persistent than the staff expected. Minutes of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2018 through 2020 and over the longer run, based on their individual assess- ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each partici- pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- priate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. These projections and policy assessments are described in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which is an addendum to these minutes. In their discussion of economic conditions and the out- look, meeting participants agreed that information re- ceived since the FOMC met in January indicated that economic activity had been rising at a moderate rate and that the labor market had continued to strengthen. Job gains had been strong in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate had stayed low. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy continued to run below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation had increased in recent months but remained low; survey- based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed, on balance. Participants noted incoming data suggesting some slow- ing in the rate of growth of household spending and business fixed investment after strong fourth-quarter readings. However, they expected that the first-quarter softness would be transitory, pointing to a variety of fac- tors, including delayed payment of some personal tax re- funds, residual seasonality in the data, and more gener- ally to strong economic fundamentals. Among the fun- damentals that participants cited were high levels of con- sumer and business sentiment, supportive financial con- ditions, improved economic conditions abroad, and re- cent changes in fiscal policy. Participants generally saw the news on spending and the labor market over the past few quarters as being consistent with continued above- trend growth and a further strengthening in labor mar- kets. Participants expected that, with further gradual in- creases in the federal funds rate, economic activity would expand at a solid rate during the remainder of this year and a moderate pace in the medium term, and that labor market conditions would remain strong. Inflation on a 12-month basis was expected to move up in coming months and to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 per- cent objective over the medium term. Several partici- pants noted that the 12-month PCE price inflation rate would likely shift upward when the March data are re- leased because the effects of the outsized decline in the prices of cell phone service plans in March of last year will drop out of that calculation. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appeared to be roughly balanced, but participants agreed that it would be important to con- tinue to monitor inflation developments closely. Many participants reported considerable optimism among the business contacts in their Districts, consistent with a firming in business expenditures. Respondents to District surveys in both the manufacturing and service sectors were generally upbeat about the economic out- look. In some Districts, reports from business contacts or evidence from surveys pointed to continuing short- ages of workers in segments of the labor market. Activ- ity in the energy sector continued to expand, with con- tacts suggesting that further increases were likely, pro- vided that sufficient labor resources were forthcoming. In contrast, contacts in the agricultural sector reported that farm income continued to experience downward pressure due to low crop prices. A number of participants reported concern among their business contacts about the possible ramifications of the recent imposition of tariffs on imported steel and alumi- num. Participants did not see the steel and aluminum tariffs, by themselves, as likely to have a significant effect on the national economic outlook, but a strong majority of participants viewed the prospect of retaliatory trade actions by other countries, as well as other issues and uncertainties associated with trade policies, as downside risks for the U.S. economy. Contacts in the agricultural sector reported feeling particularly vulnerable to retalia- tion. Tax changes enacted late last year and the recent federal budget agreement, taken together, were expected to pro- vide a significant boost to output over the next few years. However, participants generally regarded the magnitude and timing of the economic effects of the fis- cal policy changes as uncertain, partly because there have been few historical examples of expansionary fiscal pol- icy being implemented when the economy was operating at a high level of resource utilization. A number of par- ticipants also suggested that uncertainty about whether all elements of the tax cuts would be made permanent, or about the implications of higher budget deficits for fiscal sustainability and real interest rates, represented sources of downside risk to the economic outlook. A Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ few participants noted that the changes in tax policy could boost the level of potential output. Most participants described labor market conditions as strong, noting that payroll gains had remained well above the pace regarded as consistent with absorbing new labor force entrants over time, the unemployment rate had stayed low, job openings had been high, or that initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits had been low. Many participants observed that the labor force participation rate had been higher recently than they had expected, helping to keep the unemployment rate flat over the past few months despite strong payroll gains. The firmness in the overall participation rate— relative to its demographically driven downward trend— and the rising participation rate of prime-age adults were regarded as signs of continued strengthening in labor market conditions. A few participants thought that these favorable developments could continue for a time, whereas others expressed doubts. A few participants warned against inferring too much from comparisons of the current low level of the unemployment rate with his- torical benchmarks, arguing that the much higher levels of education of today’s workforce—and the lower aver- age unemployment rate of more highly educated work- ers than less educated workers—suggested that the U.S. economy might be able to sustain lower unemployment rates than was the case in the 1950s or 1960s. In some Districts, reports from business contacts or ev- idence from surveys pointed to a pickup in wages, par- ticularly for unskilled or entry-level workers. However, business contacts or national surveys led a few partici- pants to conclude that some businesses facing labor shortages were changing job requirements so that they matched more closely the skills of available workers, in- creasing training, or offering more flexible work arrange- ments, rather than increasing wages in a broad-based fashion. Regarding wage growth at the national level, several participants noted a modest increase, but most still described the pace of wage gains as moderate; a few participants cited this fact as suggesting that there was room for the labor market to strengthen somewhat fur- ther. In some Districts, surveys or business contacts reported increases in nonwage costs, particularly in the cost of materials, and in a few Districts, contacts reported pass- ing on some of those costs in the form of higher prices. Contacts in a few Districts suggested that widely known, observable cost increases—such as those associated with rising commodity prices—would be more likely to be ac- cepted and passed through to final goods prices than would less observable costs such as wage increases. A few participants argued that either an absence of pricing power among at least some firms—perhaps stemming from globalization and technological innovations, in- cluding ones that facilitate price comparisons—or the ability of firms to find ways to cut costs of production has been damping inflationary pressures. Many partici- pants stated that recent readings from indicators on in- flation and inflation expectations increased their confi- dence that inflation would rise to the Committee’s 2 per- cent objective in coming months and then stabilize around that level; others suggested that downside risks to inflation were subsiding. In contrast, a few partici- pants cautioned that, despite increases in market-based measures of inflation compensation in recent months and the stabilization of some survey measures of infla- tion expectations, the levels of these indicators remained too low to be consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. In their discussion of developments in financial markets, some participants observed that financial conditions re- mained accommodative despite the rise in market vola- tility and repricing of assets that had occurred in Febru- ary. Many participants reported that their contacts had taken the previous month’s turbulence in stride, al- though a few participants suggested that financial devel- opments over the intermeeting period highlighted some downside risks associated with still-high valuations for equities or from market volatility more generally. A few participants expressed concern that a lengthy period in which the economy operates beyond potential and fi- nancial conditions remain highly accommodative could, over time, pose risks to financial stability. In their consideration of monetary policy, participants discussed the implications of recent economic and finan- cial developments for the appropriate path of the federal funds rate. All participants agreed that the outlook for the economy beyond the current quarter had strength- ened in recent months. In addition, all participants ex- pected inflation on a 12-month basis to move up in com- ing months. This expectation partly reflected the arith- metic effect of the soft readings on inflation in early 2017 dropping out of the calculation; it was noted that the increase in the inflation rate arising from this source was widely expected and, by itself, would not justify a change in the projected path for the federal funds rate. Most participants commented that the stronger eco- nomic outlook and the somewhat higher inflation read- ings in recent months had increased the likelihood of progress toward the Committee’s 2 percent inflation ob- jective. A few participants suggested that a modest in- Minutes of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ flation overshoot might help push up longer-term infla- tion expectations and anchor them at a level consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. A number of participants offered their views on the poten- tial benefits and costs associated with an economy oper- ating well above potential for a prolonged period while inflation remained low. On the one hand, the associated tightness in the labor market might help speed the return of inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent goal and in- duce a further increase in labor force participation; on the other hand, an overheated economy could result in significant inflation pressures or lead to financial insta- bility. Based on their current assessments, almost all partici- pants expressed the view that it would be appropriate for the Committee to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting. These partic- ipants agreed that, even after such an increase in the tar- get range, the stance of monetary policy would remain accommodative, supporting strong labor market condi- tions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. A couple of participants pointed to possible benefits of postponing an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate until a subsequent meeting; these participants suggested that waiting for additional data to provide more evidence of a sustained return of the 12-month in- flation rate to 2 percent might more clearly demonstrate the data dependence of the Committee’s decisions and its resolve to achieve the price-stability component of its dual mandate. With regard to the medium-term outlook for monetary policy, all participants saw some further firming of the stance of monetary policy as likely to be warranted. Al- most all participants agreed that it remained appropriate to follow a gradual approach to raising the target range for the federal funds rate. Several participants com- mented that this gradual approach was most likely to be conducive to maintaining strong labor market condi- tions and returning inflation to 2 percent on a sustained basis without resulting in conditions that would eventu- ally require an abrupt policy tightening. A number of participants indicated that the stronger outlook for eco- nomic activity, along with their increased confidence that inflation would return to 2 percent over the medium term, implied that the appropriate path for the federal funds rate over the next few years would likely be slightly steeper than they had previously expected. Participants agreed that the longer-run normal federal funds rate was likely lower than in the past, in part because of secular forces that had put downward pressure on real interest rates. Several participants expressed the judgment that it would likely become appropriate at some point for the Committee to set the federal funds rate above its longer- run normal value for a time. Some participants sug- gested that, at some point, it might become necessary to revise statement language to acknowledge that, in pur- suit of the Committee’s statutory mandate and con- sistent with the median of participants’ policy rate pro- jections in the SEP, monetary policy eventually would likely gradually move from an accommodative stance to being a neutral or restraining factor for economic activ- ity. However, participants expressed a range of views on the amount of policy tightening that would likely be re- quired over the medium term to achieve the Commit- tee’s goals. Participants agreed that the actual path of the federal funds rate would depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the Committee met in January indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains had been strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate had stayed low. Recent data suggested that growth rates of household spending and business fixed invest- ment had moderated from their strong fourth-quarter readings. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy had continued to run below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation had increased in re- cent months but remained low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed, on balance. All members viewed the recent data and other develop- ments bearing on real economic activity as suggesting that the outlook for the economy beyond the current quarter had strengthened in recent months. In addition, notwithstanding increased market volatility over the in- termeeting period, financial conditions had stayed ac- commodative, and developments since the January meeting had indicated that fiscal policy was likely to pro- vide greater impetus to the economy over the next few years than members had previously thought. Conse- quently, members expected that, with further gradual ad- justments in the stance of monetary policy, economic ac- tivity would expand at a moderate pace in the medium term, and labor market conditions would remain strong. Members generally continued to judge the risks to the economic outlook as remaining roughly balanced. Most members noted that recent readings on inflation, along with the strengthening of the economic outlook, Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ provided support for the view that inflation on a 12-month basis would likely move up in coming months and stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. Members agreed to continue to monitor inflation developments closely. After assessing current conditions and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- bers voted to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1½ to 1¾ percent. They indicated that the stance of monetary policy remained accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sus- tained return to 2 percent inflation. Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate would depend on their assessments of realized and ex- pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in- flation. They reiterated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of infla- tion pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Members also agreed that they would carefully monitor actual and expected developments in inflation in relation to the Committee’s symmetric inflation goal. Members ex- pected that economic conditions would evolve in a man- ner that would warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate. They judged that raising the target range gradually would balance the risks to the outlook for inflation and unemployment and was most likely to support continued economic expansion. Members agreed that the strengthening in the economic outlook in recent months increased the likelihood that a gradual upward trajectory of the federal funds rate would be ap- propriate. Members continued to anticipate that the fed- eral funds rate would likely remain, for some time, below levels that were expected to prevail in the longer run. Nonetheless, they again stated that the actual path for the federal funds rate would depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective March 22, 2018, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1½ to 1¾ percent, including overnight re- verse repurchase operations (and reverse repur- chase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate week- end, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 1.50 percent, in amounts lim- ited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during March that exceeds $12 billion, and to continue rein- vesting in agency mortgage-backed securities the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during March that exceeds $8 billion. Effective in April, the Committee directs the Desk to roll over at auction the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each calen- dar month that exceeds $18 billion, and to rein- vest in agency mortgage-backed securities the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during each calendar month that exceeds $12 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Recent data suggest that growth rates of household spending and business fixed investment have moderated from their strong fourth-quarter readings. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have continued to Minutes of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ run below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have increased in recent months but remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The economic outlook has strengthened in recent months. The Committee expects that, with further gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace in the medium term and labor market conditions will remain strong. Inflation on a 12-month basis is ex- pected to move up in coming months and to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent ob- jective over the medium term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook appear roughly bal- anced, but the Committee is monitoring infla- tion developments closely. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee de- cided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1½ to 1¾ percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market condi- tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla- tion. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 per- cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac- count a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international de- velopments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation develop- ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic condi- tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, William C. Dudley, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael Brainard, Loretta J. Mester, Randal K. Quarles, and John C. Williams. Voting against this action: None. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances ¼ percentage point, to 1¾ percent, effective March 22, 2018. The Board of Governors also voted unanimously to approve a ¼ per- centage point increase in the primary credit rate (dis- count rate) to 2¼ percent, effective March 22, 2018.4 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, May 1–2, 2018. The meeting adjourned at 9:55 a.m. on March 21, 2018. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on February 20, 2018, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 30–31, 2018. _____________________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 4 In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, At- lanta, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. This vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 2¼ percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of March 22, 2018, and the date such Reserve Banks informed the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Min- neapolis were informed by the Secretary of the Board of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 2¼ percent, effective March 22, 2018.) The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of the establish- ment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- tee (FOMC) meeting held on March 20–21, 2018, meet- ing participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2018 to 2020 and over the longer run.1 Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—includ- ing a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to af- fect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the ab- sence of further shocks to the economy.2 “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster out- comes for economic activity and inflation that best sat- isfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. All participants who submitted longer-run projections expected that real GDP in 2018 would expand at a pace exceeding their individual estimates of the longer-run growth rate of real GDP. Participants generally saw real GDP growth moderating somewhat in each of the fol- lowing two years, with almost all participants who sub- mitted longer-run projections anticipating that real GDP growth in 2020 would be at or within a few tenths of a percentage point of their longer-run estimates. All par- ticipants who submitted longer-run projections expected that, throughout the projection period, the unemploy- ment rate would run below their estimates of its longer- run level. All participants projected that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would rise to or toward the Committee’s 2 per- cent objective this year and would be at or a little above that objective by 2020. Compared with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from December, a sub- stantial majority of participants marked up their projec- tions for real GDP growth and lowered their projections for the unemployment rate; participants indicated that these revisions reflected a number of factors, such as changes in fiscal policy, a stronger outlook for economic growth abroad, or recent strong job gains. For inflation, a majority of participants made slight upward revisions to their projections; these revisions were attributed to re- cent price data and the effects of a stronger economic outlook than in the December SEP. Table 1 and fig- ure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. As shown in figure 2, participants generally continued to expect that the evolution of the economy relative to their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in- flation would likely warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate. Although the median of partici- pants’ projections for the federal funds rate at the end of 2018 was unchanged relative to the December SEP, a number of participants marked up their projections for this year. Moreover, a substantial majority of partici- pants revised up their federal funds rate projections for 2019 and 2020. The median of participants’ projections for the longer-run level of the federal funds rate was slightly higher relative to the December SEP. Nearly all participants who submitted longer-run projections ex- pected that evolving economic conditions would make it appropriate for the federal funds rate to move above their estimates of its longer-run level during part of the projection period. In general, participants continued to view the uncer- tainty attached to their economic projections as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years. As in Decem- ber, most participants judged the risks around their pro- jections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation to be broadly balanced. The Outlook for Economic Activity The median of participants’ projections for the growth rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual assess- ments of appropriate monetary policy, was 2.7 percent for this year and 2.4 percent for next year. The median projection for real GDP growth in 2020 was 2.0 percent, a touch above the 1.8 percent median of participants’ longer-run estimates. Most participants cited federal fis- cal policy developments—specifically, the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018—as boosting their projections for economic ac- tivity over the next couple of years. Several participants mentioned other factors that influenced their economic 1 Three members of the Board of Governors were in office at the time of the March 2018 meeting, one member fewer than in December 2017. 2 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ , s t n e d i s e r p k n a B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F d n a s r e b m e m d r a o B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F f o s n o i t c e j o r p c i m o n o c E . 1 e l b a T 8 1 0 2 h c r a M , y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p f o s t n e m s s e s s a l a u d i v i d n i r i e h t r e d n u r e g n o L n u r 3 e g n a R 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 r e g n o L n u r 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 3 . 2 – 5 . 1 2 . 2 – 1 . 1 8 . 2 – 0 . 2 4 . 2 – 7 . 1 0 . 3 – 5 . 2 8 . 2 – 2 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 9 . 1 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 7 . 1 6 . 2 – 2 . 2 3 . 2 – 9 . 1 0 . 3 – 6 . 2 6 . 2 – 2 . 2 8 . 4 – 2 . 4 0 . 5 – 3 . 4 4 . 4 – 3 . 3 5 . 4 – 5 . 3 2 . 4 – 3 . 3 2 . 4 – 5 . 3 0 . 4 – 6 . 3 0 . 4 – 6 . 3 7 . 4 – 3 . 4 7 . 4 – 4 . 4 8 . 3 – 5 . 3 2 . 4 – 6 . 3 7 . 3 – 4 . 3 0 . 4 – 6 . 3 8 . 3 – 6 . 3 0 . 4 – 7 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 3 . 2 – 9 . 1 3 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 9 . 1 – 7 . 1 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 9 . 1 3 . 2 – 9 . 1 3 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 9 . 1 – 7 . 1 n u r 8 . 1 8 . 1 5 . 4 6 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 6 . 3 0 . 4 1 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 0 . 2 4 . 2 1 . 2 6 . 3 9 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 0 . 2 7 . 2 5 . 2 8 . 3 9 . 3 9 . 1 9 . 1 9 . 1 9 . 1 n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D P D G l a e r n i e g n a h C n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n U n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D 4 n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o C h t a p y c i l o p e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r P : o m e M n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P 2 y c n e d n e t l a r t n e C 1 n a i d e M 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 r e g n o L 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 e l b a i r a V t n e c r e P 5 . 3 – 3 . 2 0 . 3 – 3 . 2 9 . 4 – 6 . 1 1 . 4 – 4 . 1 9 . 3 – 6 . 1 6 . 3 – 4 . 1 6 . 2 – 6 . 1 6 . 2 – 1 . 1 0 . 3 – 8 . 2 0 . 3 – 8 . 2 6 . 3 – 1 . 3 1 . 3 – 6 . 2 4 . 3 – 8 . 2 1 . 3 – 4 . 2 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 4 . 2 – 9 . 1 9 . 2 8 . 2 4 . 3 1 . 3 9 . 2 7 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 2 n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e F e h t m o r f s e g n a h c t n e c r e p e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i f o s e r u s a e m h t o b r o f s n o i t c e j o r p d n a ) P D G ( t c u d o r p c i t s e m o d s s o r g l a e r n i e g n a h c f o s n o i t c e j o r P : e t o N e g n a h c f o s e t a r e g a t n e c r e p e h t e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c d n a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t o t r a e y s u o i v e r p e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f r o f e r a s n o i t c e j o r P . y g r e n e d n a d o o f g n i d u l c x e E C P r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t d n a ) E C P ( s e r u t i d n e p x e n o i t p m u s n o c l a n o s r e p r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t , y l e v i t c e p s e r , n i s n o i t c e j o r p s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a E . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t n i e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u n a i l i v i c e g a r e v a e h t r o f e r a e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t h c a e h c i h w o t e t a r e h t f o t n e m s s e s s a s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a e t n e s e r p e r s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a f o t n e m s s e s s a r e h r o s i h n o d e s a b e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p e h T . y m o n o c e e h t o t s k c o h s r e h t r u f f o e c n e s b a e h t n i d n a y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a r e d n u e g r e v n o c o t d e t c e p x e e b d l u o w e l b a i r a v t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t r o e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f e g n a r t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t f o t n i o p d i m e h t f o e u l a v e h t e r a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e d a m e r e w s n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D e h T . n u r r e g n o l e h t r e v o r o r a e y r a d n e l a c d e ﬁ i c e p s e h t f o d n e e h t t a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f l e v e l n i e g n a h c e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o l t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n O . 7 1 0 2 , 3 1 – 2 1 r e b m e c e D n o e e t t i m m o C t e k r a M n e p O l a r e d e F e h t f o g n i t e e m e h t t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n o d n a , g n i t e e m , 7 1 0 2 , 3 1 – 2 1 r e b m e c e D e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o , e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t , P D G l a e r . g n i t e e m , 8 1 0 2 , 1 2 – 0 2 h c r a M e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i s n o i t c e j o r p h c u s s n o i t c e j o r p f o r e b m u n e h t n e h W . t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f d e g n a r r a e r a s n o i t c e j o r p e h t n e h w n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , d o i r e p h c a e r o F . 1 . r a e y t a h t n i e l b a i r a v t a h t r o f , t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f , s n o i t c e j o r p ’ s t n a p i c i t r a p l l a s e d u l c n i r a e y n e v i g a n i e l b a i r a v a r o f e g n a r . r a e y h c a e n i e l b a i r a v h c a e r o f s n o i t c e j o r p t s e w o l e e r h t d n a t s e h g i h e e r h t e h t s e d u l c x e y c n e d n e t l a r t n e c e h T e h T . d e t c e l l o c t o n e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . 2 . 3 . 4 . s n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m o w t e h t f o e g a r e v a e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , n e v e s i Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2018–20 and over the longer run Percent Change in real GDP Median of projections Central tendency of projections Range of projections Actual 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer run Percent Unemployment rate 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer run Percent PCE inflation 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer run Percent Core PCE inflation 3 2 1 7 6 5 4 3 3 2 1 3 2 1 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate Percent 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 2018 2019 2020 Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par- ticipant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ projections, including accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions, strength in the global economic outlook, and continued momentum in the labor market. Compared with the December SEP, the medians of par- ticipants’ projections for real GDP growth this year and next year were up a few tenths of a percentage point. Consistent with their projections for economic activity, almost all participants expected labor market conditions to strengthen further over the projection period. The medians of projections for the unemployment rate showed that rate stepping down from 4.1 percent in the final quarter of 2017 to 3.8 percent in the final quarter of this year, and then to 3.6 percent in the final quarters of 2019 and 2020. The median of participants’ estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate was 4.5 percent. Compared with the December SEP, almost all partici- pants marked down their unemployment rate projec- tions. Some participants also lowered their estimates of the longer-run level of the unemployment rate, leading to a small decline in the corresponding median projec- tion. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- ployment rate from 2018 to 2020 and in the longer run. The distributions of individual projections for real GDP growth this year and next year shifted up noticeably from those in the December SEP; participants’ projections ranged from 2.5 to 3.0 percent in 2018 and from 2.0 to 2.8 percent in 2019. By contrast, the distributions of projected real GDP growth in 2020 and in the longer run shifted up modestly since December. Consistent with participants’ generally more upbeat outlook for real GDP growth, the distributions of individual projections for the unemployment rate were lower than the corre- sponding distributions in December for each year of the projection period. The Outlook for Inflation The medians of participants’ projections for both total and core PCE price inflation were 1.9 percent in 2018— with all participants anticipating that each measure would rise from its 2017 rate—and 2.1 percent by 2020. Compared with the December SEP, the medians of par- ticipants’ projections for each measure were unchanged this year and up 0.1 percentage point in 2020. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri- butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in- flation. Participants generally made minor upward ad- justments to their inflation projections, resulting in slight shifts of the distributions to the right relative to the dis- tributions in December. Participants generally expected each measure to increase to no more than 2 percent this year and to rise to, or edge above, 2 percent in 2019 and 2020. Appropriate Monetary Policy Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate target—or mid- point of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2018 to 2020 and in the longer run. The distributions of projected policy rates through 2020 shifted modestly higher, consistent with the revi- sions to participants’ projections of real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. For 2018, there was a notable reduction in the dispersion of participants’ views, with most participants now regarding the appro- priate target at the end of the year as being between 2.13 and 2.62 percent. For each subsequent year, the disper- sion of participants’ year-end projections was somewhat greater than that in the December SEP, and the range of participants’ projections was noticeably larger than for 2018. The median of participants’ projections of the federal funds rate rises gradually to a level of 2.1 percent at the end of this year, 2.9 percent at the end of 2019, and 3.4 percent at the end of 2020. The median of partici- pants’ longer-run estimates, at 2.9 percent, was a bit higher than in the December SEP. Nearly all partici- pants projected that it would likely be appropriate for the federal funds rate to rise above their individual longer-run estimates at some point over the forecast pe- riod. In discussing their projections, many participants con- tinued to express the view that the appropriate trajectory of the federal funds rate over the next few years would likely involve gradual increases. This view was predi- cated on several factors, including a judgment that a gradual path likely would appropriately balance the risks associated with, among other considerations, the possi- bility that inflation pressures and financial imbalances could build if economic activity were to run well above its long-run sustainable level and the possibility that the forces depressing inflation could prove to be more per- sistent than currently anticipated. Another factor men- tioned was the view that the neutral real interest rate was historically low and would likely move up only slowly. As always, the appropriate path of the federal funds rate would depend on evolving economic conditions and their implications for participants’ economic outlooks and assessments of risks. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2018–20 and over the longer run 2018 March projections December projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 Percent range 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 Number of participants 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 Percent range 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2019 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 Percent range 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 Percent range 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2018–20 and over the longer run 2018 March projections December projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2019 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2018–20 and over the longer run 2018 March projections December projections 2019 2020 Longer run 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂation, 2018–20 2018 March projections December projections 2019 2020 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2018–20 and over the longer run 2018 March projections December projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2019 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2020 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 Longer run 0.88 1.12 1.13 1.37 1.38 1.62 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 Percent range 3.13 3.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 Percent range 3.13 3.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 Percent range 3.13 3.37 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 Percent range 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.38 3.62 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Uncertainty and Risks In assessing the path for the federal funds rate that, in their view, is likely to be appropriate, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic out- comes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the poten- tial benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty, based on the forecast errors of various private and government forecasts over the past 20 years, for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and total PCE inflation. Those measures are represented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts display the median SEP projections for the three variables surrounded by symmetric confidence in- tervals derived from the forecast errors reported in ta- ble 2. If the degree of uncertainty attending these pro- jections is similar to the typical magnitude of past fore- cast errors and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these varia- bles would have about a 70 percent probability of being within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of uncertainty is substantial and generally increases as the forecast horizon lengthens. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- rounding their individual economic projections are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Nearly all participants viewed the degree of uncer- tainty attached to their economic projections about real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years, a view that was essentially unchanged from December.3 Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric around the median projections, they do not reflect any asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess- ments of the balance of risks to their economic projec- tions are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig- ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. As in December, most partici- pants judged the risks to their projections of real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, total inflation, and core inflation as broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly consistent with a symmetric fan chart. Partici- pants who saw the risks as skewed typically judged that the balance of risks was tilted toward stronger GDP growth, lower unemployment rates, and higher inflation. Compared with the December SEP, participants’ assess- ments of the balance of risks attending their projections Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Variable Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . Total consumer prices2 . . . . . 2018 ±1.5 ±0.5 ±0.9 Short-term interest rates3 . . . . ±0.9 2019 ±2.0 ±1.3 ±1.0 ±2.0 2020 ±2.0 ±1.7 ±1.1 ±2.5 NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1998 through 2017 that were re- leased in the spring by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using His- torical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), www.federal reserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2017/files/2017020pap.pdf. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. were little changed overall, with one more participant re- porting that the risks to the unemployment rate were weighted to the downside and two fewer participants re- porting that the risks to either total or core PCE inflation were weighted to the downside. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their projections, most participants noted that the magnitude and timing of the economic effects of recent changes in fiscal policy were uncertain or that fiscal policy develop- ments posed upside risks to real economic activity. Most participants also cited trade policy as a source of either uncertainty or downside risk. A few participants noted that a prolonged period of tight labor markets posed risks of higher inflation, could fuel financial imbalances, and might contribute to heightened recession risks. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the federal funds rate in response to actual and prospective devel- opments over time in real GDP growth, the unemploy- ment rate, and inflation, uncertainty surrounding the 3 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici- pants’ projections. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.A. Uncertainty and risks in projections of GDP growth Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Change in real GDP Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 4 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about GDP growth March projections December projections Risks to GDP growth March projections December projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.B. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the unemployment rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Unemployment rate Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate March projections December projections March projections December projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.C. Uncertainty and risks in projections of PCE inﬂation Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors PCE inflation Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about PCE inflation March projections December projections Risks to PCE inflation March projections December projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about core PCE inflation March projections December projections Risks to core PCE inflation March projections December projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ projected path for the federal funds rate importantly re- flects the uncertainties about the paths for those key eco- nomic variables. Figure 5 provides a graphical represen- tation of this uncertainty, plotting the median SEP pro- jection for the federal funds rate surrounded by confi- dence intervals derived from the results presented in ta- ble 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the fed- eral funds rate is substantial and increases for longer ho- rizons. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 15_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 5. Uncertainty in projections of the federal funds rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Federal funds rate Midpoint of target range Median of projections 70% confidence interval* Actual 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Percent 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com- mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The conﬁdence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to oﬀset the eﬀects of shocks to the economy. The conﬁdence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero—the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The conﬁdence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent conﬁdence interval if the conﬁdence interval has been truncated at zero. Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- tial costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.5 to 4.5 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the second and third years. The corre- sponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall infla- tion would be 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confi- dence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and cen- tered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. How- ever, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate can- not be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the down- side, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig- ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par- ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summa- rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone- tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac- tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri- ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 20–21, 2018Page 17_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee May 1–2, 2018 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 1, 2018, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, May 2, 2018, at 9:00 a.m.1 Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Lael Brainard Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles John C. Williams James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel2 Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Mary Daly, Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Margie Shanks, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Eric M. Engen and Joshua Gallin, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Stephen A. Meyer and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Jane E. Ihrig and David López-Salido, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Stephanie R. Aaronson and Norman J. Morin, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Robert Vigfusson, Assistant 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended Tuesday session only. 3 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. _ Page 1 Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Eric C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, and Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,4 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Dana L. Burnett and Rebecca Zarutskie, Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Marcelo Rezende, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ron Feldman, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Michael Dotsey, Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively Spencer Krane, Paula Tkac, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively George A. Kahn, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Richard K. Crump, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Anthony Murphy, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) provided a summary of domestic and global fi- nancial developments over the intermeeting period. Broad measures of financial conditions had tightened somewhat in recent weeks, with U.S. equity prices lower, the foreign exchange value of the dollar moderately higher, and longer-term Treasury yields up a little. Mar- ket participants pointed to a range of factors contrib- uting to the decline in stock prices, including concerns about the outlook for trade policy both in the United 4 Attended through the discussion on financial stability issues. States and abroad, the potential for increased regulatory oversight of U.S. technology companies, and incoming data suggesting some moderation in global economic growth. The rise in nominal U.S. Treasury yields was associated with an increase in inflation compensation that, in turn, seemed to reflect a firming in inflation data as well as a notable rise in crude oil prices. Judging from federal funds futures quotes, the expected path of the federal funds rate changed relatively little over the inter- meeting period. While term LIBOR (London interbank offered rates) had widened relative to comparable- maturity OIS (overnight index swap) rates in recent months, the cost of dollar funding through the foreign exchange swap market had not risen to the same degree. Recent usage of standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines had been low, consistent with a view that the recent wid- ening in LIBOR–OIS spreads did not reflect increased funding pressures or rising concerns about the condition of financial institutions. The manager discussed the role of standing liquidity swap lines in supporting financial stability and recom- mended that these swap lines be renewed at this meeting following the usual annual schedule. The manager also discussed current projections for principal payments re- ceived from mortgage-backed securities (MBS) held in the SOMA. These projections suggested that, under the Committee’s plan for balance sheet normalization, rein- vestments of MBS principal would likely cease later this year, although the timing is uncertain. The deputy manager followed with a briefing focused on recent developments in the federal funds market, noting that the effective federal funds rate had increased in re- cent weeks and had moved toward the top of the target range for the federal funds rate. In large part, this devel- opment seemed to reflect a firming in rates on repur- chase agreements (repos) that, in turn, had resulted from an increase in Treasury bill issuance and the associated higher demands for repo financing by dealers and others. Higher rates had reportedly made repos a more attrac- tive alternative investment for major lenders in the fed- eral funds market, thus reducing the availability of fund- ing in that market and putting some upward pressure on the federal funds rate. While some of the recent pressure on the federal funds rate could be expected to fade over coming weeks as the market adjusts to higher levels of Treasury bills, the gradual normalization of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the accompanying decline in Page 2 _Federal Open Market Committee reserves was anticipated to continue putting some up- ward pressure on the federal funds rate relative to the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate. The deputy manager then discussed the possibility of a small technical realignment of the IOER rate relative to the top of the target range for the federal funds rate. Since the target range was established in December 2008, the IOER rate has been set at the top of the target range to help keep the effective federal funds rate within the range. Lately the spread of the IOER rate over the effective federal funds rate had narrowed to only 5 basis points. A technical adjustment of the IOER rate to a level 5 basis points below the top of the target range could keep the effective federal funds rate well within the target range. This could be accomplished by imple- menting a 20 basis point increase in the IOER rate at a time when the Committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. Alternatively, the IOER rate could be lowered 5 basis points at a meeting in which the Committee left the target range for the fed- eral funds rate unchanged. In their discussion of this issue, participants generally agreed that it could become appropriate to make a small technical adjustment in the Federal Reserve’s approach to implementing monetary policy by setting the IOER rate modestly below the top of the target range for the federal funds rate. Such an adjustment would be con- sistent with the Committee’s statement in the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans that it would be pre- pared to adjust the details of the approach to policy im- plementation during the period of normalization in light of economic and financial developments. Many partici- pants judged that it would be useful to make such a tech- nical adjustment sooner rather than later. Participants generally agreed that it would be desirable to make that adjustment at a time when the FOMC decided to in- crease the target range for the federal funds rate; that timing would simplify FOMC communications and em- phasize that the IOER rate is a helpful tool for imple- menting the FOMC’s policy decisions but does not, in itself, convey the stance of policy. While additional tech- nical adjustments in the IOER rate could become nec- essary over time, these were not expected to be frequent. A number of participants also suggested that, before too long, the Committee might want to further discuss how it can implement monetary policy most effectively and efficiently when the quantity of reserve balances reaches a level appreciably below that seen in recent years. The Committee voted unanimously to renew the recip- rocal currency arrangements with the Bank of Canada and the Bank of Mexico; these arrangements are associ- ated with the Federal Reserve’s participation in the North American Framework Agreement of 1994. In ad- dition, the Committee voted unanimously to renew the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss Na- tional Bank. The votes to renew the Federal Reserve’s participation in these standing arrangements are taken annually at the April or May FOMC meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet- ing period. There were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the System’s account during the intermeeting period. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the May 1–2 meeting in- dicated that labor market conditions continued to strengthen in the first quarter, while real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a moderate pace. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12‐month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption ex- penditures (PCE), was 2 percent in March. Survey‐ based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were, on balance, little changed. Total nonfarm payroll employment rose less in March than in the previous two months, but the increase for the first quarter as a whole was solid. The labor force participation rate edged down in March but moved up a little, on net, in the first quarter. The national unemploy- ment rate remained at 4.1 percent for a sixth consecutive month. Similarly, the unemployment rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics were roughly flat, on balance, in recent months. The share of workers em- ployed part time for economic reasons was little changed at a rate close to that prevailing before the previous re- cession. The rate of private-sector job openings stayed at an elevated level in February, the rate of quits re- mained high, and initial claims for unemployment insur- ance benefits continued to be low through mid-April. Recent readings showed that increases in labor compen- sation stepped up modestly over the past year. The em- ployment cost index for private workers rose 2.8 percent over the 12 months ending in March, and average hourly earnings for all employees increased 2.7 percent over that period. Both increases were larger than those re- ported for the 12 months ending in March 2017. Total industrial production increased in March and rose at a solid pace for the first quarter as a whole, with gains Minutes of the Meeting of May 1–2, 2018_ Page 3 in the output of manufacturers, mines, and utilities. Au- tomakers’ schedules suggested that assemblies of light motor vehicles would edge down in the second quarter from the average pace in the first quarter, but broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as the new orders indexes from national and regional manufactur- ing surveys, continued to point to further gains in factory output in the near term. Consumer expenditures rose at a modest pace in the first quarter following a strong gain in the preceding quarter. Monthly data pointed to some improvement toward the end of the quarter, as real PCE moved up in March after declining in January and February. However, the recent movements might have partly reflected the effects of a delay in many federal tax refunds, which could have shifted some consumer spending from February to March. Light motor vehicle sales stepped down in the first quarter after a strong fourth-quarter pace that was partly boosted by replacement sales following the fall hurricanes; sales declined in April, but indicators of ve- hicle demand remained upbeat. More broadly, key fac- tors that influence consumer spending—including gains in employment and real disposable personal income, along with households’ elevated net worth—should con- tinue to support solid real PCE growth in the near term. In addition, the lower tax withholding resulting from the tax cuts enacted late last year was likely to provide some impetus to spending in coming months. Consumer sen- timent, as measured by the University of Michigan Sur- veys of Consumers, remained elevated in April. Real residential investment was unchanged in the first quarter after a strong increase in the fourth quarter. Starts for new single-family homes decreased in March, but the average pace in the first quarter was little changed from the fourth quarter. In contrast, starts of multifamily units moved up in March after contracting in February, and they were higher in the first quarter than in the fourth. Sales of both new and existing homes increased in February and March. Real private expenditures for business equipment and in- tellectual property increased at a moderate pace in the first quarter after rising briskly in the second half of last year. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft edged down in March. However, forward-looking indicators of business equipment spending—such as the backlog of unfilled capital goods orders, along with upbeat readings on business senti- ment from national and regional surveys—continued to point to robust gains in equipment spending in the near term. Real business expenditures for nonresidential structures rose at a robust pace in the first quarter, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in opera- tion—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to move up through mid-April. Total real government purchases rose at a slower rate in the first quarter than in the fourth quarter. Real federal purchases increased in the first quarter, with gains in both defense and nondefense spending. Real purchases by state and local governments also moved higher; state and local government payrolls were unchanged in the first quarter, but nominal construction spending by these governments rose somewhat. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in February as imports rose briskly, outpacing the increase in exports. Preliminary data on trade in goods suggested that the trade deficit narrowed sharply in March, with exports continuing to grow robustly but imports retrac- ing earlier gains. The Bureau of Economic Analysis es- timated that the change in real net exports added slightly to growth of real GDP in the first quarter. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 2 percent over the 12 months end- ing in March. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.9 percent over that same period. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2.4 percent over the 12 months ending in March, while core CPI inflation was 2.1 percent. Re- cent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations—including those from the Michi- gan survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on balance. Incoming data suggested that foreign economic activity continued to expand at a solid pace. Real GDP growth picked up in the first quarter in several emerging market economies (EMEs), including Mexico, China, and some other parts of emerging Asia. However, incoming data in a number of advanced foreign economies (AFEs)— in particular, real GDP in the United Kingdom— showed somewhat slower growth than market partici- pants were expecting, partly because of transitory factors such as severe weather. Overall, inflation in most AFEs and EMEs continued to be subdued, increasing in the AFEs in the first quarter on higher energy prices but Page 4 _Federal Open Market Committee stepping down some in the EMEs, partly reflecting lower food prices in some Asian economies. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Early in the intermeeting period, uncertainty over trade policy and negative news about the technology sector re- portedly contributed to lower prices for risky assets, but these concerns subsequently seemed to recede amid stronger-than-expected corporate earnings reports. Eq- uity prices declined, nominal Treasury yields increased modestly, and market-based measures of inflation com- pensation ticked up on net. Meanwhile, financing con- ditions for nonfinancial businesses and households largely remained supportive of spending. FOMC communications over the intermeeting period were generally viewed by market participants as reflect- ing an upbeat outlook for economic growth and as con- sistent with a continued gradual removal of monetary policy accommodation. The FOMC’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at the March meeting was widely anticipated. Market re- action to the release of the March FOMC minutes later in the intermeeting period was minimal. The probability of an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate occurring at the May FOMC meeting, as implied by quotes on federal funds futures contracts, remained close to zero; the probability of an increase at the June FOMC meeting rose to about 90 percent by the end of the intermeeting period. Expected levels of the federal funds rate at the end of 2019 and 2020 implied by OIS rates rose modestly. The nominal Treasury yield curve continued to flatten over the intermeeting period, with yields on 2-year and 10-year Treasury securities up 17 basis points and 7 basis points, respectively. Measures of inflation compensa- tion derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Securi- ties increased 4 basis points and 7 basis points at the 5- and 5-to-10-year horizons, respectively, against a backdrop of rising oil prices. Option-implied measures of volatility of longer-term interest rates continued to decline over the intermeeting period after their marked increase earlier this year. The S&P 500 index decreased over the period on net. Equity prices declined early in the intermeeting period, reportedly in response to trade tensions between the United States and China as well as negative news about the technology sector. However, equity prices subse- quently retraced some of the earlier declines as concerns about trade policy seemed to ease and corporate earn- ings reports for the first quarter of 2018 generally came in stronger than expected. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index at the one-month horizon—the VIX—declined but remained at elevated levels relative to 2017, ending the period at approximately 15 percent. On net, spreads of yields of investment-grade corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened a bit, while spreads for speculative-grade cor- porate bonds were unchanged. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained generally stable over the intermeeting period. Spreads on term money market instruments relative to comparable- maturity OIS rates were still larger than usual in some segments of the money market. Reflecting the FOMC’s policy action in March, yields on a broad set of money market instruments moved about 25 basis points higher. Bill yields also stayed high relative to OIS rates as cumu- lative Treasury bill supply remained elevated. Money market dynamics over quarter-end were muted relative to previous quarter-ends. Foreign equity markets were mixed over the intermeet- ing period, with investors attuned to developments re- lated to U.S. and Chinese trade policies and to news about the U.S. technology sector. Broad Japanese and European equity indexes outperformed their U.S. coun- terparts, ending the period somewhat higher. Market- based measures of policy expectations and longer-term yields were little changed in the euro area and Japan but declined modestly in the United Kingdom on weaker- than-expected economic data. Longer-term yields in Canada moved up moderately amid notably higher oil prices. In EMEs, sovereign bond spreads edged up; cap- ital continued to flow into EME mutual funds, although at a slower pace lately. On net, the broad nominal dollar index appreciated moderately over the intermeeting period. In the early part of the period, the index depreciated slightly, as rela- tively positive news about the current round of NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) negotiations led to appreciation of the Mexican peso and Canadian dollar, two currencies with large weights in the index. Later in the period, there was a broad-based appreciation of the dollar against most currencies as U.S. yields in- creased relative to those in AFEs and as the Mexican peso declined amid uncertainty associated with the up- coming presidential elections. Growth in banks’ commercial and industrial (C&I) loans strengthened in March and the first half of April follow- ing relatively weak growth in January and February. Re- spondents to the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) reported that their institutions had eased standards and terms on Minutes of the Meeting of May 1–2, 2018_ Page 5 C&I loans in the first quarter, most often citing in- creased competition from other lenders as the reason for doing so. Gross issuance of corporate bonds and lever- aged loans was strong in March, and equity issuance was robust. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations was stable over the intermeeting period, and the ratio of aggregate debt to assets remained near multidecade highs. Commercial real estate (CRE) financing conditions re- mained accommodative over the intermeeting period. CRE loan growth at banks strengthened in March but edged down in the first half of April. Spreads on com- mercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) were little changed over the intermeeting period and remained near their post-crisis lows. CMBS issuance continued to be strong in March but slowed somewhat in April. Re- spondents to the April SLOOS reported easing stan- dards on nonfarm nonresidential loans and tightening standards on multifamily loans, whereas standards on construction and land development loans were little changed in the first quarter. Meanwhile, respondents in- dicated weaker demand for loans across these three CRE loan categories. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative for most borrowers in March and April. For borrowers with low credit scores, condi- tions continued to ease, but credit remained relatively tight and the volume of mortgage loans extended to this group remained low. Banks responding to the April SLOOS reported weaker loan demand across most resi- dential real estate (RRE) loan categories, while standards were reportedly about unchanged for most RRE loan types in the first quarter. Consumer credit growth moderated in March and the first half of April. Respondents to the April SLOOS re- ported that standards and terms on auto and credit card loans tightened, and that demand for these loans weak- ened in the first quarter. On balance, credit remained readily available to prime-rated borrowers, but tight for subprime borrowers, over the intermeeting period. The staff provided its latest report on potential risks to financial stability; the report again characterized the fi- nancial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as moderate on balance. This overall assessment incorpo- rated the staff’s judgment that vulnerabilities associated with asset valuation pressures, while having come down a little in recent months, nonetheless continued to be el- evated. The staff judged vulnerabilities from financial- sector leverage and maturity and liquidity transformation to be low, vulnerabilities from household leverage as be- ing in the low-to-moderate range, and vulnerabilities from leverage in the nonfinancial business sector as ele- vated. The staff also characterized overall vulnerabilities to foreign financial stability as moderate while highlight- ing specific issues in some foreign economies, includ- ing—depending on the country—elevated asset valua- tion pressures, high private or sovereign debt burdens, and political uncertainties. Staff Economic Outlook The staff projection for U.S. economic activity prepared for the May FOMC meeting continued to suggest that the economy was expanding at an above-trend pace. Real GDP growth, which slowed in the first quarter, was expected to pick up in the second quarter and to outpace potential output growth through 2020. The unemploy- ment rate was projected to decline further over the next few years and to continue to run below the staff’s esti- mate of its longer-run natural rate over this period. Rel- ative to the forecast prepared for the March meeting, the projection for real GDP growth in 2018 was revised down a little, primarily in response to incoming con- sumer spending data that were somewhat softer than the staff had expected. Beyond 2018, the projection for GDP growth was essentially unrevised. With real GDP rising a little less, on balance, over the forecast period, the projected decline in the unemployment rate over the next few years was also a touch smaller than in the pre- vious forecast. The near-term projection for consumer price inflation was revised up slightly in response to incoming data on prices. Beyond the near term, the forecast for inflation was a bit lower than in the previous projection, reflecting the slightly higher unemployment rate in the new fore- cast. The rates of both total and core PCE price infla- tion were projected to be faster in 2018 than in 2017. The staff projected that total PCE inflation would be near the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the next several years. Total PCE inflation was expected to run slightly below core inflation in 2019 and 2020 because of a projected decline in energy prices. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the upside, recent fiscal policy changes could lead to a greater ex- pansion in economic activity over the next few years than the staff projected. On the downside, those fiscal policy changes could yield less impetus to the economy Page 6 _Federal Open Market Committee than the staff expected if the economy was already op- erating above its potential level and resource utilization continued to tighten, as the staff projected. Risks to the inflation projection also were seen as balanced. An up- side risk was that inflation could increase more than ex- pected in an economy that was projected to move fur- ther above its potential. Downside risks included the possibilities that longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than was assumed or that the run of low core inflation readings last year could prove to be more per- sistent than the staff expected. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of the economic situation and the outlook, meeting participants agreed that information received since the FOMC met in March indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had stayed low. Recent data sug- gested that growth of household spending had moder- ated from its strong fourth-quarter pace, while business fixed investment had continued to grow strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy had moved close to 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compen- sation remained low; survey-based measures of longer- term inflation expectations were little changed, on bal- ance. Participants viewed recent readings on spending, em- ployment, and inflation as suggesting little change, on balance, in their assessments of the economic outlook. Real GDP growth slowed somewhat less in the first quarter than anticipated at the time of the March meet- ing, and participants expected that the moderation in the growth of consumer spending early in the year would prove temporary. They noted a number of economic fundamentals were currently supporting continued above-trend economic growth; these included a strong labor market, federal tax and spending policies, high lev- els of household and business confidence, favorable fi- nancial conditions, and strong economic growth abroad. Participants generally expected that further gradual in- creases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with solid expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. Participants generally viewed the risks to the economic outlook to be roughly balanced. Participants generally reported that their business con- tacts were optimistic about the economic outlook. However, in a number of Districts, contacts expressed concern about the possible adverse effects of tariffs and trade restrictions, including the potential for postponing or pulling back on capital spending. Labor markets were generally strong, and contacts in a number of Districts reported shortages of workers in specific industries or occupations. In some cases, labor shortages were con- tributing to upward pressure on wages. In many Dis- tricts, business contacts experienced rising costs of nonlabor inputs, particularly trucking, rail, and shipping rates and prices of steel, aluminum, lumber, and petroleum-based commodities. Reports on the ability of firms to pass through higher costs to customers varied across Districts. Activity in the energy sector remained strong, and crude oil production was expected to con- tinue to expand in response to rising global demand. In contrast, in agricultural areas, low crop prices continued to weigh on farm income. It was noted that the potential for higher Chinese tariffs on key agricultural products could, in the longer run, hurt U.S. competitiveness. Participants generally agreed that labor market condi- tions strengthened further during the first quarter of the year. Nonfarm payroll employment posted strong gains, averaging 200,000 per month. The unemployment rate was unchanged, but at a level below most estimates of its longer-run normal rate. Both the overall labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ra- tio moved up. The first-quarter data from the employ- ment cost index indicated that the strength in the labor market was showing through to a gradual pickup in wage increases, although the signal from other wage measures was less clear. Many participants commented that over- all wage pressures were still moderate or were strong only in industries and occupations experiencing very tight labor supply; several of them noted that recent wage developments provided little evidence of general overheating in the labor market. With economic growth anticipated to remain above trend, participants generally expected the unemployment rate to remain below, or to decline further below, their estimates of its longer-run normal rate. Several participants also saw scope for a strong labor market to continue to draw individuals into the workforce. However, a few others questioned whether tight labor markets would have a lasting positive effect on labor force participation. The 12-month changes in overall and core PCE prices moved up in March, to 2 percent and 1.9 percent, re- spectively. Most participants viewed the recent firming in inflation as providing some reassurance that inflation Minutes of the Meeting of May 1–2, 2018_ Page 7 was on a trajectory to achieve the Committee’s symmet- ric 2 percent objective on a sustained basis. In particular, the recent readings appeared to support the view that the downside surprises last year were largely transitory. Some participants noted that inflation was likely to mod- estly overshoot 2 percent for a time. However, several participants suggested that the underlying trend in infla- tion had changed little, noting that some of the recent increase in inflation may have represented transitory price changes in some categories of health care and fi- nancial services, or that various measures of underlying inflation, such as the 12-month trimmed mean PCE in- flation rate from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, re- mained relatively stable at levels below 2 percent. In dis- cussing the outlook for inflation, many participants em- phasized that, after an extended period of low inflation, the Committee’s longer-run policy objective was to re- turn inflation to its symmetric 2 percent goal on a sus- tained basis. Many saw tight resource utilization, the pickup in wage increases and nonlabor input costs, and stable inflation expectations as supporting their projec- tions that inflation would remain near 2 percent over the medium term. But a few cautioned that, although market-based measures of inflation compensation had moved up over recent months, in their view these measures, as well as some survey-based measures, re- mained at levels somewhat below those that would be consistent with an expectation of sustained 2 percent in- flation as measured by the PCE price index. Participants commented on a number of risks and un- certainties associated with their expectations for eco- nomic activity, the labor market, and inflation over the medium term. Some participants saw a risk that, as re- source utilization continued to tighten, supply con- straints could develop that would intensify upward wage and price pressures, or that financial imbalances could emerge, which could eventually erode the sustainability of the economic expansion. Alternatively, some partici- pants thought that a strengthening labor market could bring a further increase in labor supply, allowing the un- employment rate to decline further with less upward pressure on wages and prices. Another area of uncer- tainty was the outlook for fiscal and trade policies. Sev- eral participants continued to note the challenge of as- sessing the timing and magnitude of the effects of recent fiscal policy changes on household and business spend- ing and on labor supply over the next several years. In addition, they saw the trajectory of fiscal policy thereaf- ter as difficult to forecast. With regard to trade policies, a number of participants viewed the range of possible outcomes for economic activity and inflation to be par- ticularly wide, depending on what actions were taken by the United States and how U.S trading partners re- sponded. And some participants observed that while these policies were being debated and negotiations con- tinued, the uncertainty surrounding trade issues could damp business sentiment and spending. In their discus- sion of the outlook for inflation, a few participants also noted the risk that, if global oil prices remained high or moved higher, U.S. inflation would be boosted by the direct effects and pass-through of higher energy costs. Financial conditions tightened somewhat over the inter- meeting period but remained accommodative overall. The foreign exchange value of the dollar rose modestly, but this move retraced only a bit of the depreciation of the dollar since its 2016 peak. With their decline over the intermeeting period, equity prices were about un- changed, on net, since the beginning of the year but were still near their historical highs. Longer-term Treasury yields rose, but somewhat less than shorter-term yields, and the yield curve flattened somewhat further. In commenting on the staff’s assessment of financial sta- bility, a couple of participants noted that after the bout of financial market volatility in early February, the use of investment strategies predicated on a low-volatility envi- ronment may have become less prevalent, and that some investors may have become more cautious. However, asset valuations across a range of markets and leverage in the nonfinancial corporate sector remained elevated relative to historical norms, leaving some borrowers vul- nerable to unexpected negative shocks. With regard to the ability of the financial system to absorb such shocks, several participants commented that regulatory reforms since the crisis had contributed to appreciably stronger capital and liquidity positions in the financial sector. In this context, a few participants emphasized the need to build additional resilience in the financial sector at this point in the economic expansion. In their consideration of monetary policy over the near term, participants discussed the implications of recent economic and financial developments for the outlook for economic growth, labor market conditions, and in- flation and, in turn, for the appropriate path of the fed- eral funds rate. All participants expressed the view that it would be appropriate for the Committee to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at the May meeting. Participants concurred that information received during the intermeeting period had not materi- ally altered their assessment of the outlook for the econ- omy. Participants commented that above-trend growth Page 8 _Federal Open Market Committee in real GDP in recent quarters, together with somewhat higher recent inflation readings, had increased their con- fidence that inflation on a 12-month basis would con- tinue to run near the Committee’s longer-run 2 percent symmetric objective. That said, it was noted that it was premature to conclude that inflation would remain at levels around 2 percent, especially after several years in which inflation had persistently run below the Commit- tee’s 2 percent objective. In light of subdued inflation over recent years, a few participants observed that ad- justments in the stance of policy should take account of the possibility that longer-term inflation expectations have drifted a bit below levels consistent with the Com- mittee’s 2 percent inflation objective. Most participants judged that if incoming information broadly confirmed their current economic outlook, it would likely soon be appropriate for the Committee to take another step in removing policy accommodation. Overall, participants agreed that the current stance of monetary policy re- mained accommodative, supporting strong labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation on a sus- tained basis. With regard to the medium-term outlook for monetary policy, all participants reaffirmed that adjustments to the path for the policy rate would depend on their assess- ments of the evolution of the economic outlook and risks to the outlook relative to the Committee’s statutory objectives. Participants generally agreed with the assess- ment that continuing to raise the target range for the fed- eral funds rate gradually would likely be appropriate if the economy evolves about as expected. These partici- pants commented that this gradual approach was most likely to be conducive to maintaining strong labor mar- ket conditions and achieving the symmetric 2 percent in- flation objective on a sustained basis without resulting in conditions that would eventually require an abrupt pol- icy tightening. A few participants commented that re- cent news on inflation, against a background of contin- ued prospects for a solid pace of economic growth, sup- ported the view that inflation on a 12-month basis would likely move slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent ob- jective for a time. It was also noted that a temporary period of inflation modestly above 2 percent would be consistent with the Committee’s symmetric inflation ob- jective and could be helpful in anchoring longer-run in- flation expectations at a level consistent with that objec- tive. Meeting participants also discussed the recent flatter profile of the term structure of interest rates. Partici- pants pointed to a number of factors contributing to the flattening of the yield curve, including the expected grad- ual rise of the federal funds rate, the downward pressure on term premiums from the Federal Reserve’s still-large balance sheet as well as asset purchase programs by other central banks, and a reduction in investors’ esti- mates of the longer-run neutral real interest rate. A few participants noted that such factors could make the slope of the yield curve a less reliable signal of future However, several participants economic activity. thought that it would be important to continue to mon- itor the slope of the yield curve, emphasizing the histor- ical regularity that an inverted yield curve has indicated an increased risk of recession. Participants commented on how the Committee’s com- munications in its postmeeting statement might need to be revised in coming meetings if the economy evolved broadly as expected. A few participants noted that if in- creases in the target range for the federal funds rate con- tinued, the federal funds rate could be at or above their estimates of its longer-run normal level before too long. In addition, a few observed that the neutral level of the federal funds rate might currently be lower than their es- timates of its longer-run level. In light of this, some par- ticipants noted it might soon be appropriate to revise the forward-guidance language in the statement indicating that the “federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run” or to modify the language stating that “the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative.” Participants expressed a range of views on the amount of further policy firming that would likely be required over the medium term to achieve the Committee’s goals. Participants indicated that the Committee, in making policy decisions over the next few years, should conduct policy with the aim of keeping inflation near its longer- run symmetric objective while sustaining the economic expansion and a strong labor market. Participants agreed that the actual path of the federal funds rate would depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming information. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the Committee met in March indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the un- employment rate had stayed low. Recent data suggested that growth of household spending had moderated from its strong fourth-quarter pace, while business fixed in- vestment continued to grow strongly. On a 12-month Minutes of the Meeting of May 1–2, 2018_ Page 9 basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy had moved close to 2 percent. In particular, in March the 12-month percent increase in PCE prices was equal to the Committee’s longer-run ob- jective of 2 percent, while the measure excluding food and energy prices was only slightly below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation re- mained low, and survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed, on balance. All members viewed the recent data as indicating that the outlook for the economy had changed little since the previous meeting. In addition, financial conditions, al- though somewhat tighter than at the time of the March FOMC meeting, had stayed accommodative overall, while fiscal policy was likely to provide sizable impetus to the economy over the next few years. Consequently, members expected that, with further gradual adjust- ments to the stance of monetary policy, economic activ- ity would expand at a moderate pace in the medium term and labor market conditions would remain strong. Members agreed that inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to run near the Committee’s symmetric 2 per- cent objective over the medium term. Members judged that the risks to the economic outlook appeared to be roughly balanced. After assessing current conditions and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- bers agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent. They noted that the stance of monetary policy remained accommodative, thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent in- flation. Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate would depend on their assessments of realized and ex- pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in- flation. They reiterated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of infla- tion pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Members also agreed that they would carefully monitor actual and expected developments in inflation in relation to the Committee’s symmetric inflation goal. Members ex- pected that economic conditions would evolve in a man- ner that would warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate. Members agreed that the federal funds rate was likely to remain, for some time, below levels that they expected to prevail in the longer run. However, they noted that the actual path of the federal funds rate would depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective May 3, 2018, the Federal Open Mar- ket Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to main- tain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1½ to 1¾ percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol- iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer- ing rate of 1.50 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per- counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each cal- endar month that exceeds $18 billion, and to re- invest in agency mortgage-backed securities the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during each calendar month that exceeds $12 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been strong, on Page 10 _Federal Open Market Committee average, in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate has stayed low. Recent data suggest that growth of household spending moderated from its strong fourth-quarter pace, while busi- investment continued to grow ness fixed strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall in- flation and inflation for items other than food and energy have moved close to 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensa- tion remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with further gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will ex- pand at a moderate pace in the medium term and labor market conditions will remain strong. Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected to run near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective over the medium term. Risks to the eco- nomic outlook appear roughly balanced. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee de- cided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent. The stance of remains accommodative, monetary policy thereby supporting strong labor market condi- tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla- tion. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 per- cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac- count a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international de- velopments. The Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected inflation develop- ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic condi- tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, William C. Dudley, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael Brainard, Loretta J. Mester, Randal K. Quarles, and John C. Williams. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un- changed at 1¾ percent and voted unanimously to ap- prove establishment of the primary credit rate (discount rate) at the existing level of 2¼ percent.5 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 12–13, 2018. The meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m. on May 2, 2018. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on April 10, 2018, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on March 20–21, 2018. _____________________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 5 The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and sea- sonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates. Minutes of the Meeting of May 1–2, 2018_ Page 11 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee June 12–13, 2018 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 12, 2018, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 13, 2018, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Lael Brainard Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles John C. Williams James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine,2 Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher,2 and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Ellen E. Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors John J. Stevens and Stacey Tevlin, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Jeffrey D. Walker,3 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Min Wei, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended Tuesday session only. 3 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Burcu Duygan-Bump, Norman J. Morin, John Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, Senior Research Advisor, Sabelhaus, and Paul A. Smith, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors John Ammer,2 Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Dan Li, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Martin Bodenstein and Marcel A. Priebsch, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Logan T. Lewis, Principal Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Maria Otoo, Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Marcelo Ochoa, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Kenneth C. Montgomery, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Jeff Fuhrer, Daniel G. Sullivan, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively Marc Giannoni, Paolo A. Pesenti, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, New York, and Minneapolis, respectively Roc Armenter, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Willem Van Zandweghe, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) provided a summary of developments in do- mestic and global financial markets over the intermeet- ing period. Developments in emerging market econo- mies (EMEs) and in Europe were the focus of consider- able attention by financial market participants over re- cent weeks. Investor perceptions of increased economic and political vulnerabilities in several EMEs led to a no- table depreciation in EME currencies relative to the dol- lar. Market participants reported that an unwinding of investor positions had been a factor amplifying these currency moves. In Europe, concerns about the political situation in Italy and its potential economic implications prompted a significant widening in risk spreads on Ital- ian sovereign securities. The share prices of Italian banks and other banks that could be exposed to Italy declined sharply. In domestic financial markets, expec- tations for the path of the federal funds rate were little changed over the intermeeting period. The manager noted that the release of the minutes of the May FOMC meeting, and particularly the reference to a possible tech- nical adjustment in the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate relative to the top of the FOMC’s target range for the federal funds rate, prompted a small reduc- tion in federal funds futures rates. The deputy manager followed with a discussion of money markets and open market operations. Rates on Treasury repurchase agreements (repo) had remained el- evated in recent weeks, apparently responding, in part, to increased Treasury issuance over recent months. In light of the firmness in repo rates, the volume of opera- tions conducted through the Federal Reserve’s over- night reverse repurchase agreement facility remained low. Elevated repo rates may also have contributed to some upward pressure on the effective federal funds rate in recent weeks as lenders in that market shifted some of their investments to earn higher rates available in repo markets. The deputy manager also discussed the current outlook for reinvestment purchases of agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS). Based on current projections, principal payments on the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency MBS would likely be lower than the monthly cap on redemptions that will be in effect beginning in the fall of this year. Consistent with the June 2017 addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, rein- vestment purchases of agency MBS then are projected Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ to fall to zero from that point onward. However, prin- cipal payments on agency MBS are sensitive to changes in various factors, particularly long-term interest rates. As a result, agency MBS principal payments could rise above the monthly redemption cap in some future sce- narios and thus require MBS reinvestment purchases. In light of this possibility, the deputy manager described plans for the Desk to conduct small value purchases of agency MBS on a regular basis in order to maintain op- erational readiness. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet- ing period. There were no intervention operations in for- eign currencies for the System's account during the in- termeeting period. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the June 12–13 meeting indicated that labor market conditions continued to strengthen in recent months, and that real gross domes- tic product (GDP) appeared to be rising at a solid rate in the first half of the year. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), was 2 percent in April. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a strong pace, on average, in April and May. The national unem- ployment rate edged down in both months and was 3.8 percent in May. The unemployment rates for Afri- can Americans, Asians, and Hispanics all declined, on net, from March to May; the rate for African Americans was the lowest on record but still noticeably above the rates for other groups. The overall labor force partici- pation rate edged down in April and May but was still at about the same level as a year earlier. The share of work- ers employed part time for economic reasons was little changed at a level close to that from just before the pre- vious recession. The rate of private-sector job openings rose in March and stayed at that elevated level in April; the rate of quits edged up, on net, over those two months; and initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits continued to be low through early June. Recent readings showed that increases in labor compensation stepped up over the past year. Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased 2.7 percent over the four quarters ending in the first quarter of this year (compared with 1.9 percent over the same four quarters a year earlier), and average hourly earnings for all employees increased 2.7 percent over the 12 months ending in May (compared with 2.5 percent over the same 12 months a year earlier). Total industrial production increased at a solid pace in April, but the available indicators for May, particularly production worker hours in manufacturing, indicated that output declined in that month. Automakers’ sched- ules suggested that assemblies of light motor vehicles would increase in the coming months, and broader indi- cators of manufacturing production, such as the new or- ders indexes from national and regional manufacturing surveys, continued to point to solid gains in factory out- put in the near term. Consumer spending appeared to be increasing briskly in the second quarter after rising at only a modest pace in the first quarter. Real PCE increased at a robust pace in April after a strong gain in March. Although light motor vehicle sales declined in May, indicators of vehicle de- mand generally remained upbeat. More broadly, recent readings on key factors that influence consumer spend- ing—including gains in employment, real disposable personal income, and households’ net worth—contin- ued to be supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. In addition, the lower tax withholding result- ing from the tax cuts enacted late last year still appeared likely to provide some additional impetus to spending in coming months. Consumer sentiment, as measured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, re- mained elevated in May. Residential investment appeared to be declining further in the second quarter after decreasing in the first quarter. Starts for new single-family homes were unchanged in April from their first-quarter average, but starts of mul- tifamily units declined noticeably. Sales of both new and existing homes decreased in April. Real private expenditures for business equipment and in- tellectual property appeared to be rising at a moderate pace in the second quarter after a somewhat faster in- crease in the first quarter. Nominal shipments of non- defense capital goods excluding aircraft rose in April, and forward-looking indicators of business equipment spending—such as the backlog of unfilled capital goods orders, along with upbeat readings on business senti- ment from national and regional surveys—continued to point to robust gains in equipment spending in the near term. Real business expenditures for nonresidential structures appeared to be expanding at a solid pace again in the second quarter, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business Minutes of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ spending for structures in the drilling and mining sec- tor—increased, on net, from mid-April through early June. Nominal federal government spending data for April and May pointed to an increase in real federal purchases in the second quarter. Real state and local government purchases also appeared to be moving up; although nominal construction expenditures by these govern- ments edged down in April, their payrolls rose at a mod- erate pace, on net, in April and May. Net exports made a negligible contribution to real GDP growth in the first quarter, with growth of both real ex- ports and real imports slowing from the brisk pace of the fourth quarter of last year. After narrowing in March, the nominal trade deficit narrowed further in April, as exports continued to increase while imports de- clined slightly, which suggested that net exports might add modestly to real GDP growth in the second quarter. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 2.0 percent over the 12 months ending in April. Core PCE price inflation, which ex- cludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.8 percent over that same period. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2.8 percent over the 12 months ending in May, while core CPI inflation was 2.2 percent. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run infla- tion expectations—including those from the Michigan survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on balance. Incoming data suggested that foreign economic activity continued to expand at a solid pace. Real GDP growth picked up in the first quarter in several EMEs—includ- ing Mexico, China, and much of emerging Asia—al- though recent indicators pointed to some moderation in the pace of activity in most EMEs. By contrast, in the advanced foreign economies (AFEs), real GDP growth slowed in the first quarter, owing partly to temporary factors such as labor strikes in some European countries and bad weather in Japan. More recent indicators pointed to a partial rebound in AFE economic growth in the second quarter. Inflation pressures in the foreign economies generally remained subdued, even though higher oil prices put some upward pressure on headline inflation. Staff Review of the Financial Situation During the intermeeting period, global financial markets were buffeted by increased concerns about the outlook for foreign growth and political developments in Italy, but these concerns subsequently eased. On net, Treas- ury yields were little changed despite significant intra- period moves, and the dollar appreciated notably as a range of AFE and EME currencies and sovereign bonds came under pressure. However, broad domestic stock price indexes increased, on net, as generally strong cor- porate earnings reports helped support prices. Mean- while, financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses and households remained supportive of economic activ- ity on balance. Over the intermeeting period, macroeconomic data re- leases signaling moderating growth in some foreign economies, along with downside risks stemming from political developments in Italy and several EMEs, weighed on prices of foreign risk assets. These develop- ments, together with a still-solid economic outlook for the United States, supported an increase in the broad trade-weighted index of the foreign exchange value of the dollar. The dollar appreciated notably against several EME cur- rencies (primarily those of Argentina, Turkey, Mexico, and Brazil), as the increase in U.S. interest rates since late 2017, along with political developments and other issues, intensified concerns about financial vulnerabilities. EME mutual funds saw slight net outflows, and, on bal- ance, EME sovereign spreads widened and equity prices edged lower. In the AFEs, sovereign spreads in some peripheral European countries widened and European bank shares came under pressure, as investors focused on political developments in Italy. Broad equity indexes in the euro area, with the exception of Italy, ended the period little changed, while those in Canada, the United Kingdom, and Japan edged higher. Market-based measures of expected policy rates were little changed, on balance, and flight-to-safety flows reportedly contrib- uted to declines in German longer-term sovereign yields. FOMC communications over the intermeeting period— including the May FOMC statement and the May FOMC meeting minutes—elicited only minor reactions in asset markets. Quotes on federal funds futures con- tracts suggested that the probability of an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate occurring at the June FOMC meeting inched up further to near certainty. Levels of the federal funds rate at the end of 2019 and 2020 implied by overnight index swap (OIS) rates were little changed on net. Longer-term nominal Treasury yields ended the period largely unchanged despite notable movements during Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the intermeeting period. Measures of inflation compen- sation derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Secu- rities were also little changed on net. Broad U.S. equity price indexes increased about 5 per- cent, on net, since the May FOMC meeting, boosted in part by the stronger-than-expected May Employment Situation report. Stock prices also appeared to have been buoyed by first-quarter earnings reports that gen- erally beat expectations—particularly for the technology sector, which outperformed the broader market. How- ever, the turbulence abroad and, to a lesser degree, mounting concerns about trade policy weighed on equity prices at times. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 at the one-month horizon—the VIX—was down somewhat, on net, remaining just a couple of per- centage points above the very low levels that prevailed before early February. Over the intermeeting period, spreads of yields on nonfinancial corporate bonds over those of comparable-maturity Treasury securities wid- ened moderately for both investment- and speculative- grade firms. However, these spreads remained low by historical standards. Over the intermeeting period, short-term funding mar- kets stayed generally stable despite still-elevated spreads between rates on some private money market instru- ments and OIS rates of similar maturity. While some of the factors contributing to pressures in short-term fund- ing markets had eased recently, the three-month spread between the London interbank offered rate and the OIS rate remained significantly wider than at the start of the year. Growth of outstanding commercial and industrial loans held by banks appeared to have moderated in May after a strong reading in April. The issuance of institutional leveraged loans was strong in April and May; meanwhile, corporate bond issuance was weak, likely reflecting sea- sonal patterns. Gross issuance of municipal bonds in April and May was solid, as issuance continued to re- cover from the slow pace recorded at the start of the year. Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE) remained accommodative. Even so, the growth of CRE loans held by banks ticked down in April and May. Commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) issu- ance, in general, continued at a robust pace; although is- suance softened somewhat in April, partly reflecting sea- sonal factors, it recovered in May. Spreads on CMBS were little changed over the intermeeting period, remain- ing near their post-crisis lows. Residential mortgage financing conditions remained ac- commodative for most borrowers. For borrowers with low credit scores, conditions stayed tight but continued to ease. Growth in home-purchase mortgages slowed a bit and refinancing activity continued to be muted in re- cent months, with both developments partly reflecting the rise in mortgage rates earlier this year. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets were little changed in the first few months of 2018, on bal- ance, and remained largely supportive of growth in household spending. Growth in consumer credit slowed a bit in the first quarter, as seasonally adjusted credit card balances were about flat after having surged in the fourth quarter of last year. Financing conditions for consumers with subprime credit scores continued to tighten, likely contributing to a decline in auto loan extensions to such borrowers. Staff Economic Outlook In the U.S. economic forecast prepared for the June FOMC meeting, the staff continued to project that the economy would expand at an above-trend pace. Real GDP appeared to be rising at a much faster pace in the second quarter than in the first, and it was forecast to increase at a solid rate in the second half of this year. Over the 2018–20 period, output was projected to rise further above the staff’s estimate of its potential, and the unemployment rate was projected to decline further be- low the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate. Relative to the forecast prepared for the May meeting, the projection for real GDP growth beyond the first half of 2018 was revised down a little in response to a higher assumed path for the exchange value of the dollar. In addition, the staff continued to anticipate that supply constraints might restrain output growth somewhat. With real GDP rising a little less, on balance, over the forecast period, the projected decline in the unemploy- ment rate over the next few years was a touch smaller than in the previous forecast. The staff forecast for total PCE price inflation from 2018 to 2020 was not revised materially. Total consumer price inflation over the first half of 2018 appeared to be a little lower than in the previous projection, mainly be- cause of slightly softer incoming data on nonmarket prices, but the forecast for the second half of the year was a little higher, reflecting an upward revision to pro- jected consumer energy prices over the next couple of quarters. The staff continued to project that total PCE inflation would remain near the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term and that core PCE price inflation would run slightly higher than total inflation Minutes of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ over that period because of a projected decline in con- sumer energy prices in 2019 and 2020. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the upside, recent fiscal policy changes could lead to a greater ex- pansion in economic activity over the next few years than the staff projected. On the downside, those fiscal policy changes could yield less impetus to the economy than the staff expected if, for example, the marginal pro- pensities to consume for groups most affected by the tax cuts are lower than the staff had assumed. Risks to the inflation projection also were seen as balanced. The up- side risk that inflation could increase more than expected in an economy that was projected to move further above its potential was counterbalanced by the downside risk that longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than was assumed in the staff forecast. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2018 through 2020 and over the longer run, based on their individual assess- ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each partici- pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- priate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. These projections and policy assessments are described in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is an addendum to these minutes. In their discussion of the economic situation and the outlook, meeting participants agreed that information received since the FOMC met in May indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that eco- nomic activity had been rising at a solid rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined. Recent data suggested that growth of household spending had picked up, while business fixed investment had continued to grow strongly. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and core inflation, which excludes changes in food and energy prices, had both moved close to 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed, on balance. Participants viewed recent readings on spending, em- ployment, and inflation as suggesting little change, on balance, in their assessments of the economic outlook. Incoming data suggested that GDP growth strengthened in the second quarter of this year, as growth of consumer spending picked up after slowing earlier in the year. Par- ticipants noted a number of favorable economic factors that were supporting above-trend GDP growth; these included a strong labor market, stimulative federal tax and spending policies, accommodative financial condi- tions, and continued high levels of household and busi- ness confidence. They also generally expected that fur- ther gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. Participants generally viewed the risks to the economic outlook as roughly bal- anced. Participants reported that business fixed investment had continued to expand at a strong pace in recent months, supported in part by substantial investment growth in the energy sector. Higher oil prices were expected to continue to support investment in that sector, and Dis- trict contacts in the industry were generally upbeat, though supply constraints for labor and infrastructure were reportedly limiting expansion plans. By contrast, District reports regarding the construction sector were mixed, although here, too, some contacts reported that supply constraints were acting as a drag on activity. Con- ditions in both the manufacturing and service sectors in several Districts were reportedly strong and were seen as contributing to solid investment gains. However, many District contacts expressed concern about the possible adverse effects of tariffs and other proposed trade re- strictions, both domestically and abroad, on future in- vestment activity; contacts in some Districts indicated that plans for capital spending had been scaled back or postponed as a result of uncertainty over trade policy. Contacts in the steel and aluminum industries expected higher prices as a result of the tariffs on these products but had not planned any new investments to increase ca- pacity. Conditions in the agricultural sector reportedly improved somewhat, but contacts were concerned about the effect of potentially higher tariffs on their exports. that Participants agreed labor market conditions strengthened further over the intermeeting period. Nonfarm payroll employment posted strong gains in re- cent months, averaging more than 200,000 per month this year. The unemployment rate fell to 3.8 percent in Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ May, below the estimate of each participant who submit- ted a longer-run projection. Participants pointed to other indicators such as a very high rate of job openings and an elevated quits rate as additional signs that labor market conditions were strong. With economic growth anticipated to remain above trend, participants generally expected the unemployment rate to remain below, or de- cline further below, their estimates of its longer-run nor- mal rate. Several participants, however, suggested that there may be less tightness in the labor market than im- plied by the unemployment rate alone, because there was further scope for a strong labor market to continue to draw individuals into the workforce. Contacts in several Districts reported difficulties finding qualified workers, and, in some cases, firms were coping with labor shortages by increasing salaries and benefits in order to attract or retain workers. Other business contacts facing labor shortages were responding by in- creasing training for less-qualified workers or by invest- ing in automation. On balance, for the economy overall, recent data on average hourly earnings indicated that wage increases remained moderate. A number of partic- ipants noted that, with the unemployment rate expected to remain below estimates of its longer-run normal rate, they anticipated wage inflation to pick up further. Participants noted that the 12-month changes in both overall and core PCE prices had recently moved close to 2 percent. The recent large increases in consumer en- ergy prices had pushed up total PCE price inflation rel- ative to the core measure, and this divergence was ex- pected to continue in the near term, resulting in a tem- porary increase in overall inflation above the Commit- tee’s 2 percent longer-run objective. In general, partici- pants viewed recent price developments as consistent with their expectation that inflation was on a trajectory to achieve the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec- tive on a sustained basis, although a number of partici- pants noted that it was premature to conclude that the Committee had achieved that objective. The generally favorable outlook for inflation was buttressed by reports from business contacts in several Districts suggesting some firming of inflationary pressures; for example, many business contacts indicated that they were experi- encing rising input costs, and, in some cases, firms ap- peared to be passing these cost increases through to con- sumer prices. Although core inflation and the 12-month trimmed mean PCE inflation rate calculated by the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Dallas remained a little below 2 percent, many participants anticipated that high levels of resource utilization and stable inflation expectations would keep overall inflation near 2 percent over the me- dium term. In light of inflation having run below the Committee’s 2 percent objective for the past several years, a few participants cautioned that measures of longer-run inflation expectations derived from financial market data remained somewhat below levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Accordingly, in their view, investors appeared to judge the expected path of inflation as running a bit below 2 percent over the medium run. Some participants raised the concern that a prolonged period in which the economy operated beyond potential could give rise to heightened inflation- ary pressures or to financial imbalances that could lead eventually to a significant economic downturn. Participants commented on a number of risks and un- certainties associated with their outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation over the medium term. Most participants noted that uncertainty and risks associated with trade policy had intensified and were concerned that such uncertainty and risks eventually could have negative effects on business sentiment and investment spending. Participants generally continued to see recent fiscal policy changes as supportive of eco- nomic growth over the next few years, and a few indi- cated that fiscal policy posed an upside risk. A few par- ticipants raised the concern that fiscal policy is not cur- rently on a sustainable path. Many participants saw po- tential downside risks to economic growth and inflation associated with political and economic developments in Europe and some EMEs. Meeting participants also discussed the term structure of interest rates and what a flattening of the yield curve might signal about economic activity going forward. Participants pointed to a number of factors, other than the gradual rise of the federal funds rate, that could con- tribute to a reduction in the spread between long-term and short-term Treasury yields, including a reduction in investors’ estimates of the longer-run neutral real inter- est rate; lower longer-term inflation expectations; or a lower level of term premiums in recent years relative to historical experience reflecting, in part, central bank as- set purchases. Some participants noted that such factors might temper the reliability of the slope of the yield curve as an indicator of future economic activity; how- ever, several others expressed doubt about whether such factors were distorting the information content of the yield curve. A number of participants thought it would be important to continue to monitor the slope of the yield curve, given the historical regularity that an in- verted yield curve has indicated an increased risk of re- cession in the United States. Participants also discussed Minutes of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ a staff presentation of an indicator of the likelihood of recession based on the spread between the current level of the federal funds rate and the expected federal funds rate several quarters ahead derived from futures market prices. The staff noted that this measure may be less affected by many of the factors that have contributed to the flattening of the yield curve, such as depressed term premiums at longer horizons. Several participants cau- tioned that yield curve movements should be interpreted within the broader context of financial conditions and the outlook, and would be only one among many con- siderations in forming an assessment of appropriate pol- icy. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants generally agreed that the economic expan- sion was progressing roughly as anticipated, with real economic activity expanding at a solid rate, labor market conditions continuing to strengthen, and inflation near the Committee’s objective. Based on their current as- sessments, almost all participants expressed the view that it would be appropriate for the Committee to con- tinue its gradual approach to policy firming by raising the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting. These participants agreed that, even after such an increase in the target range, the stance of mon- etary policy would remain accommodative, supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. One participant remarked that, with inflation having run consistently below 2 percent in re- cent years and market-based measures of inflation com- pensation still low, postponing an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate would help push infla- tion expectations up to levels consistent with the Com- mittee’s objective. With regard to the medium-term outlook for monetary policy, participants generally judged that, with the econ- omy already very strong and inflation expected to run at 2 percent on a sustained basis over the medium term, it would likely be appropriate to continue gradually raising the target range for the federal funds rate to a setting that was at or somewhat above their estimates of its longer- run level by 2019 or 2020. Participants reaffirmed that adjustments to the path for the policy rate would depend on their assessments of the evolution of the economic outlook and risks to the outlook relative to the Commit- tee’s statutory objectives. Participants pointed to various reasons for raising short- term interest rates gradually, including the uncertainty surrounding the level of the federal funds rate in the longer run, the lags with which changes in monetary pol- icy affect the economy, and the potential constraints on adjustments in the target range for the federal funds rate in response to adverse shocks when short-term interest rates are low. In addition, a few participants saw survey- or market-based indicators as suggesting that inflation expectations were not yet firmly anchored at a level con- sistent with the Committee’s objective. A few also noted that a temporary period of inflation modestly above 2 percent could be helpful in anchoring longer-run infla- tion expectations at a level consistent with the Commit- tee’s symmetric objective. Participants offered their views about how much addi- tional policy firming would likely be required to sustain- ably achieve the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Many noted that, if gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate continued, the federal funds rate could be at or above their estimates of its neutral level sometime next year. In that regard, participants discussed how the Committee’s communications might evolve over com- ing meetings if the economy progressed about as antici- pated; in particular, a number of them noted that it might soon be appropriate to modify the language in the postmeeting statement indicating that “the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative.” Participants supported a plan to implement a technical adjustment to the IOER rate that would place it at a level 5 basis points below the top of the FOMC’s target range for the federal funds rate. A few participants suggested that, before too long, the Committee might want to fur- ther discuss how it can implement monetary policy most effectively and efficiently when the quantity of reserve balances reaches a level appreciably below that seen re- cently. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the FOMC met in May indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a solid rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined. Recent data suggested that growth of household spending had picked up, while business fixed investment had continued to grow strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy had moved close to 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expecta- tions were little changed, on balance. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Members viewed the recent data as consistent with a strong economy that was evolving about as they had ex- pected. They judged that continuing along a path of gradual policy firming would balance the risk of moving too quickly, which could leave inflation short of a sus- tained return to the Committee’s symmetric goal, against the risk of moving too slowly, which could lead to a buildup of inflation pressures or material financial im- balances. Consequently, members expected that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective over the medium term. Members continued to judge that the risks to the economic outlook remained roughly balanced. After assessing current conditions and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- bers voted to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1¾ to 2 percent. They indicated that the stance of monetary policy remained accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sus- tained return to 2 percent inflation. Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate would depend upon their assessment of realized and ex- pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum employment objective and symmetric 2 per- cent inflation objective. They reiterated that this assess- ment would take into account a wide range of infor- mation, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expecta- tions, and readings on financial and international devel- opments. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members fa- vored the removal of the forward-guidance language stating that “the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run.” Members noted that, although this forward-guidance language had been useful for com- municating the expected path of the federal funds rate during the early stages of policy normalization, this lan- guage was no longer appropriate in light of the strong state of the economy and the current expected path for policy. Moreover, the removal of the forward-guidance language and other changes to the statement should streamline and facilitate the Committee’s communica- tions. Importantly, the changes were a reflection of the progress toward achieving the Committee’s statutory goals and did not reflect a shift in the approach to policy going forward. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective June 14, 2018, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1¾ to 2 percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol- iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer- ing rate of 1.75 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per- counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during June that exceeds $18 billion, and to continue reinvesting the in agency mortgage-backed securities amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during June that exceeds $12 billion. Effective in July, the Committee directs the Desk to roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury se- curities maturing during each calendar month that exceeds $24 billion, and to reinvest in agency mortgage-backed securities the amount of principal payments from the Federal Re- serve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during each calendar month that exceeds $16 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” Minutes of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in May indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a solid rate. Job gains have been strong, on aver- age, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined. Recent data suggest that growth of household spending has picked up, while business fixed investment has continued to grow strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have moved close to 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective over the medium term. Risks to the eco- nomic outlook appear roughly balanced. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee de- cided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1¾ to 2 percent. The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting strong labor market condi- tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla- tion. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, William C. Dudley, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael Brainard, Loretta J. Mester, Randal K. Quarles, and John C. Williams. Voting against this action: None. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances to 1.95 percent, effective June 14, 2018. The Board of Governors also voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate (discount rate) to 2½ percent, effective June 14, 2018.4 Election of Committee Vice Chairman By unanimous vote, the Committee selected John C. Williams to serve as Vice Chairman, effective on June 18, 2018, until the selection of a successor at the Committee’s first regularly scheduled meeting in 2019. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 31– August 1, 2018. The meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m. on June 13, 2018. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on May 22, 2018, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on May 1-2, 2018. _____________________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 4 In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Fran- cisco. This vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 2½ percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Bank, effective on the later of June 14, 2018, and the date such Reserve Bank informed the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Sec- retary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was informed by the Secretary of the Board of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 2½ percent, effective June 14, 2018.) The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- tee (FOMC) meeting held on June 12–13, 2018, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2018 to 2020 and over the longer run.1 Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—includ- ing a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to af- fect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the ab- sence of further shocks to the economy.2 “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster out- comes for economic activity and inflation that best sat- isfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. All participants who submitted longer-run projections expected that, in 2018, real GDP would expand at a pace exceeding their individual estimates of the longer-run growth rate of real GDP. Participants generally saw real GDP growth moderating somewhat in each of the fol- lowing two years but remaining above their estimates of the longer-run rate. All participants who submitted longer-run projections expected that, throughout the projection period, the unemployment rate would run be- low their estimates of its longer-run level. All partici- pants projected that inflation, as measured by the four- quarter percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would run at or slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective by the end of 2018 and remain roughly flat through 2020. Compared with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from March, most participants slightly marked up their projections of real GDP growth in 2018 and some- what lowered their projections for the unemployment rate from 2018 through 2020; participants indicated that these revisions reflected, in large part, strength in incom- ing data. A large majority of participants made slight up- ward adjustments to their projections of inflation in 2018. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. As shown in figure 2, participants generally continued to expect that the evolution of the economy relative to their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in- flation would likely warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate. The central tendencies of partic- ipants’ projections of the federal funds rate for both 2018 and 2019 were roughly unchanged, but the medians for both years were 25 basis points higher relative to March. Nearly all participants who submitted longer- run projections expected that, during part of the projec- tion period, evolving economic conditions would make it appropriate for the federal funds rate to move some- what above their estimates of its longer-run level. In general, participants continued to view the uncer- tainty attached to their economic projections as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years. As in March, most participants judged the risks around their projec- tions for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation to be broadly balanced. The Outlook for Economic Activity The median of participants’ projections for the growth rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual assess- ments of appropriate monetary policy, was 2.8 percent for this year and 2.4 percent for next year. The median was 2.0 percent for 2020, a touch above the median pro- jection of longer-run growth. Most participants contin- ued to cite fiscal policy as a driver of strong economic activity over the next couple of years. Many participants also mentioned accommodative monetary policy and fi- nancial conditions, strength in the global outlook, con- tinued momentum in the labor market, or positive read- ings on business and consumer sentiment as important factors shaping the economic outlook. Compared with the March SEP, the median of participants’ projections for the rate of real GDP growth was 0.1 percentage point higher for this year and unchanged for the next two years. Almost all participants expected the unemployment rate to decline somewhat further over the projection period. The median of participants’ projections for the unem- ployment rate was 3.6 percent for the final quarter of this year and 3.5 percent for the final quarters of 2019 1 Three members of the Board of Governors were in office at the time of the June 2018 meeting. 2 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ , s t n e d i s e r p k n a B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F d n a s r e b m e m d r a o B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F f o s n o i t c e j o r p c i m o n o c E . 1 e l b a T 8 1 0 2 e n u J , y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p f o s t n e m s s e s s a l a u d i v i d n i r i e h t r e d n u r e g n o L n u r 3 e g n a R 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 r e g n o L n u r 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 5 . 1 3 . 2 – 5 . 1 7 . 2 – 1 . 2 8 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 3 – 5 . 2 0 . 3 – 5 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 6 . 2 – 2 . 2 6 . 2 – 2 . 2 0 . 3 – 7 . 2 0 . 3 – 6 . 2 7 . 4 – 1 . 4 8 . 4 – 2 . 4 0 . 4 – 3 . 3 4 . 4 – 3 . 3 8 . 3 – 3 . 3 2 . 4 – 3 . 3 8 . 3 – 5 . 3 0 . 4 – 6 . 3 6 . 4 – 3 . 4 7 . 4 – 3 . 4 7 . 3 – 4 . 3 8 . 3 – 5 . 3 5 . 3 – 4 . 3 7 . 3 – 4 . 3 7 . 3 – 6 . 3 8 . 3 – 6 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 9 . 1 3 . 2 – 9 . 1 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 n u r 8 . 1 8 . 1 5 . 4 5 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 5 . 3 6 . 3 1 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 2 4 . 2 4 . 2 5 . 3 6 . 3 1 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 2 8 . 2 7 . 2 6 . 3 8 . 3 1 . 2 9 . 1 0 . 2 9 . 1 n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M P D G l a e r n i e g n a h C n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n U n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M 4 n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o C h t a p y c i l o p e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r P : o m e M 2 y c n e d n e t l a r t n e C 1 n a i d e M 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 r e g n o L 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 e l b a i r a V t n e c r e P 5 . 3 – 3 . 2 5 . 3 – 3 . 2 1 . 4 – 9 . 1 9 . 4 – 6 . 1 6 . 3 – 9 . 1 9 . 3 – 6 . 1 6 . 2 – 9 . 1 6 . 2 – 6 . 1 0 . 3 – 8 . 2 0 . 3 – 8 . 2 6 . 3 – 1 . 3 6 . 3 – 1 . 3 4 . 3 – 9 . 2 4 . 3 – 8 . 2 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 9 . 2 9 . 2 4 . 3 4 . 3 1 . 3 9 . 2 4 . 2 1 . 2 n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e F e h t m o r f s e g n a h c t n e c r e p e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i f o s e r u s a e m h t o b r o f s n o i t c e j o r p d n a ) P D G ( t c u d o r p c i t s e m o d s s o r g l a e r n i e g n a h c f o s n o i t c e j o r P : e t o N e g n a h c f o s e t a r e g a t n e c r e p e h t e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c d n a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t o t r a e y s u o i v e r p e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f r o f e r a s n o i t c e j o r P . y g r e n e d n a d o o f g n i d u l c x e E C P r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t d n a ) E C P ( s e r u t i d n e p x e n o i t p m u s n o c l a n o s r e p r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t , y l e v i t c e p s e r , n i s n o i t c e j o r p s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a E . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t n i e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u n a i l i v i c e g a r e v a e h t r o f e r a e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t h c a e h c i h w o t e t a r e h t f o t n e m s s e s s a s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a e t n e s e r p e r s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a f o t n e m s s e s s a r e h r o s i h n o d e s a b e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p e h T . y m o n o c e e h t o t s k c o h s r e h t r u f f o e c n e s b a e h t n i d n a y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a r e d n u e g r e v n o c o t d e t c e p x e e b d l u o w e l b a i r a v t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t r o e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f e g n a r t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t f o t n i o p d i m e h t f o e u l a v e h t e r a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e d a m e r e w s n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M e h T . n u r r e g n o l e h t r e v o r o r a e y r a d n e l a c d e ﬁ i c e p s e h t f o d n e e h t t a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f l e v e l l a e r n i e g n a h c e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o l t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n O . 8 1 0 2 , 1 2 – 0 2 h c r a M n o e e t t i m m o C t e k r a M n e p O l a r e d e F e h t f o g n i t e e m e h t h c u s t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n o d n a , g n i t e e m , 8 1 0 2 , 1 2 – 0 2 h c r a M e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o , e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t , P D G . g n i t e e m , 8 1 0 2 , 3 1 – 2 1 e n u J e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i s n o i t c e j o r p s n o i t c e j o r p f o r e b m u n e h t n e h W . t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f d e g n a r r a e r a s n o i t c e j o r p e h t n e h w n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , d o i r e p h c a e r o F . 1 . r a e y t a h t n i e l b a i r a v t a h t r o f , t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f , s n o i t c e j o r p ’ s t n a p i c i t r a p l l a s e d u l c n i r a e y n e v i g a n i e l b a i r a v a r o f e g n a r . r a e y h c a e n i e l b a i r a v h c a e r o f s n o i t c e j o r p t s e w o l e e r h t d n a t s e h g i h e e r h t e h t s e d u l c x e y c n e d n e t l a r t n e c e h T e h T . d e t c e l l o c t o n e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . 2 . 3 . 4 . s n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m o w t e h t f o e g a r e v a e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , n e v e s i Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2018–20 and over the longer run Change in real GDP Median of projections Central tendency of projections Range of projections Actual 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Unemployment rate 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 PCE inflation 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Core PCE inflation Percent 3 2 1 Longer run Percent 7 6 5 4 3 Longer run Percent 3 2 1 Longer run Percent 3 2 1 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate Percent 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 2018 2019 2020 Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par- ticipant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ and 2020. The median of participants’ estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate was unchanged at 4.5 percent. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- ployment rate from 2018 to 2020 and over the longer run. The distribution of individual projections for real GDP growth this year shifted up noticeably from that in the March SEP. By contrast, the distributions of pro- jected real GDP growth in 2019 and 2020 and over the longer run were little changed. The distributions of in- dividual projections for the unemployment rate in 2018 to 2020 shifted down relative to the distributions in March, while the downward shift in the distribution of longer-run projections was very modest. The Outlook for Inflation The medians of participants’ projections for total and core PCE price inflation in 2018 were 2.1 percent and 2.0 percent, respectively, and the median for each meas- ure was 2.1 percent in 2019 and 2020. Compared with the March SEP, the medians of participants’ projections for total PCE price inflation for this year and next were revised up slightly. Some participants pointed to incom- ing data on energy prices as a reason for their upward revisions. The median of participants’ forecasts for core PCE price inflation was up a touch for this year and un- changed for subsequent years. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri- butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in- flation. The distributions of both total and core PCE price inflation for 2018 shifted to the right relative to the distributions in March. The distributions of projected inflation in 2019, 2020, and over the longer run were roughly unchanged. Participants generally expected each measure to be at or slightly above 2 percent in 2019 and 2020. Appropriate Monetary Policy Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate target—or mid- point of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2018 to 2020 and over the longer run. The distributions of projected policy rates through 2020 shifted modestly higher, consistent with the revisions to participants’ projections of real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. As in their March projections, a large majority of participants anticipated that evolving economic conditions would likely warrant the equivalent of a total of either three or four increases of 25 basis points in the target range for the federal funds rate over 2018. There was a slight re- duction in the dispersion of participants’ views, with no participant regarding the appropriate target at the end of the year to be below 1.88 percent. For each subsequent year, the dispersion of participants’ year-end projections was somewhat smaller than that in the March SEP. The medians of participants’ projections of the federal funds rate rose gradually to 2.4 percent at the end of this year, 3.1 percent at the end of 2019, and 3.4 percent at the end of 2020. The median of participants’ longer-run estimates, at 2.9 percent, was unchanged relative to the March SEP. In discussing their projections, many participants con- tinued to express the view that the appropriate trajectory of the federal funds rate over the next few years would likely involve gradual increases. This view was predi- cated on several factors, including a judgment that a gradual path of policy firming likely would appropriately balance the risks associated with, among other consider- ations, the possibilities that U.S. fiscal policy could have larger or more persistent positive effects on real activity and that shifts in trade policy or developments abroad could weigh on the expansion. As always, the appropri- ate path of the federal funds rate would depend on evolving economic conditions and their implications for participants’ economic outlooks and assessments of risks. Uncertainty and Risks In assessing the path for the federal funds rate that, in their view, is likely to be appropriate, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic out- comes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the poten- tial benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty, based on the forecast errors of various private and government forecasts over the past 20 years, for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are represented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts display the median SEP projections for the three variables surrounded by symmetric confi- dence intervals derived from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the degree of uncertainty attending these projections is similar to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these varia- bles would have about a 70 percent probability of being within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of uncertainty is substantial and generally increases as the forecast horizon lengthens. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2018–20 and over the longer run 2018 June projections March projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Percent range 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 Number of participants 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Percent range 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2019 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Percent range 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Percent range 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2018–20 and over the longer run 2018 June projections March projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 2019 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2018–20 and over the longer run 2018 June projections March projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 2019 2020 Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Percent range Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂation, 2018–20 Number of participants 2018 June projections March projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 2019 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Percent range Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2018–20 and over the longer run 2018 June projections March projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.38 3.37 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2019 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.38 3.37 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.38 3.37 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.63 1.87 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.38 3.37 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Variable Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . Total consumer prices2 . . . . . 2018 ±1.3 ±0.4 ±0.7 Short-term interest rates3 . . . . ±0.7 2019 ±2.0 ±1.2 ±1.0 ±2.0 2020 ±2.1 ±1.8 ±1.0 ±2.2 NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1998 through 2017 that were re- leased in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using His- torical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), www.federal reserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2017/files/2017020pap.pdf. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- rounding their individual economic projections are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Nearly all participants viewed the degree of uncer- tainty attached to their economic projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years, a view that was essentially unchanged from March.3 Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric around the median projections, they do not reflect any asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess- ments of the balance of risks to their economic projec- tions are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig- ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Most participants judged the risks to their projections of real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, total inflation, and core inflation as broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly consistent with a symmetric fan chart. Compared with March, even more participants saw the risks to their projections as broadly balanced. Specifically, for GDP growth, only one participant viewed the risks as tilted to the downside, and the number of participants who viewed the risks as tilted to the upside dropped from four to two. For the unemployment rate, the number of participants who saw the risks as tilted toward low readings dropped from four to two. For inflation, all but one participant judged the risks to either total or core PCE price inflation as broadly balanced. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their projections, several participants continued to point to fiscal developments as a source of upside risk, many par- ticipants cited developments related to trade policy as posing downside risks to their growth forecasts, and a few participants also pointed to political developments in Europe or the global outlook more generally as down- side-risk factors. A few participants noted that the ap- preciation of the dollar posed downside risks to the in- flation outlook. A few participants also noted the risk of inflation moving higher than anticipated as the unem- ployment rate falls. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate were also subject to considera- ble uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the fed- eral funds rate in response to actual and prospective de- velopments over time in real GDP growth, the unem- ployment rate, and inflation, uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the federal funds rate importantly re- flects the uncertainties about the paths for those key eco- nomic variables. Figure 5 provides a graphical represen- tation of this uncertainty, plotting the median SEP pro- jection for the federal funds rate surrounded by confi- dence intervals derived from the results presented in ta- ble 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the fed- eral funds rate is substantial and increases for longer ho- rizons. 3 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici- pants’ projections. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.A. Uncertainty and risks in projections of GDP growth Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Percent Change in real GDP Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual 4 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about GDP growth June projections March projections Risks to GDP growth June projections March projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.B. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the unemployment rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Unemployment rate Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate June projections March projections June projections March projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.C. Uncertainty and risks in projections of PCE inﬂation Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Percent PCE inflation Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about PCE inflation June projections March projections Risks to PCE inflation June projections March projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about core PCE inflation June projections March projections Risks to core PCE inflation June projections March projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 5. Uncertainty in projections of the federal funds rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Percent Federal funds rate Midpoint of target range Median of projections 70% confidence interval* Actual 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com- mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The conﬁdence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to oﬀset the eﬀects of shocks to the economy. The conﬁdence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero—the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The conﬁdence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent conﬁdence interval if the conﬁdence interval has been truncated at zero. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 12–13, 2018Page 15_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- tial costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.7 to 4.3 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence inter- vals for overall inflation would be 1.3 to 2.7 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projec- tion might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmet- rically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig- ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par- ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summa- rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone- tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac- tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri- ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee July 31–August 1, 2018 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 31, 2018, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, August 1, 2018, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman John C. Williams, Vice Chairman Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Lael Brainard Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively Mark A. Gould, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Mary Daly, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ellen E. Meade, Edward Nelson, and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors John J. Stevens, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. _ Page 1 Luca Guerrieri, Deputy Associate Director, Division of A. Lee Smith, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank Financial Stability, Board of Governors of Kansas City Glenn Follette and Shane M. Sherlund, Assistant Brent Meyer, Policy Advisor and Economist, Federal Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Reserve Bank of Atlanta Cristina Arellano, Monetary Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Etienne Gagnon,4 Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Matthias Paustian,4 Section Chief, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Hess T. Chung,4 Group Manager, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Andrea Ajello, Edward Herbst, and Bernd Schlusche,4 Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors James M. Trevino,4 Technology Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michael Dotsey, Beverly Hirtle, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, and St. Louis, respectively Anna Paulson, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Joe Peek, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Karel Mertens, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound The staff provided a briefing that summarized its analy- sis of the extent to which some of the Committee’s mon- etary policy tools could provide adequate policy accom- modation if, in future economic downturns, the policy rate were again to become constrained by the effective lower bound (ELB).5 The staff examined simulations from the staff’s FRB/US model and various other eco- nomic models to assess the likelihood of the policy rate returning to the ELB and to evaluate how much addi- tional policy accommodation could be delivered by the current toolkit. This toolkit included threshold-based forward-guidance policies, in which the Committee communicates that the federal funds rate will remain at the ELB until either inflation or the unemployment rate reaches a certain threshold, and balance sheet policies, involving increases in the size or duration of the Federal Reserve’s asset holdings. The staff’s analysis indicated that under various policy rules, including those prescribing aggressive reductions in the federal funds rate in response to adverse economic shocks, there was a meaningful risk that the ELB could bind sometime during the next decade. That analysis also implied that threshold-based forward guidance and balance sheet actions could provide additional accom- modation that could help support economic activity and mitigate disinflationary pressures in these episodes. In the model simulations, because of unanticipated shocks and lags in the transmission of the effects of monetary policy actions on economic activity and inflation, the ef- fectiveness of monetary policy in general, including for- ward-guidance and balance sheet policies, was limited in mitigating the initial downturn in the economy. The staff noted that there was considerable uncertainty sur- rounding the estimated effects of those policies on the economy; in addition, estimates of how frequently the 3 Attended Tuesday session only. 4 Attended through the discussion of monetary policy options at the effective lower bound. 5 In the analysis, the staff assumed that the ELB was 12.5 basis points, equal to the midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate from December 2008 to December 2015. Page 2 _Federal Open Market Committee ELB could bind in the future differed across the models that the staff examined. In the discussion that followed the staff’s briefing, par- ticipants generally agreed that their current toolkit could provide significant accommodation but expressed con- cern about the potential limits on policy effectiveness stemming from the ELB. They viewed it as a matter of prudent planning to evaluate potential policy options in advance of such ELB events. Many participants com- mented on the monetary policy implications of the ap- parent secular decline in neutral real interest rates. That decline was viewed as likely driven by various factors, including slower trend growth of the labor force and productivity as well as increased demand for safe assets. In such circumstances, those participants saw monetary policy as having less scope than in the past to reduce the federal funds rate in response to negative shocks. Ac- cordingly, in their view, spells at the ELB could become more frequent and protracted than in the past, con- sistent with the staff’s analysis. Moreover, the secular decline in interest rates was a global phenomenon, and a couple of participants emphasized that this decline in- creased the likelihood that the ELB could bind simulta- neously in a number of countries. A few other partici- pants raised the concern that frequent or extended ELB episodes could result in expectations for inflation that were below the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec- tive, further limiting the scope for reductions in the fed- eral funds rate to serve as a buffer for the economy and increasing the likelihood of ELB episodes. Fiscal policy was viewed as a potentially important tool in addressing a future economic downturn in which monetary policy was constrained by the ELB; however, countercyclical fiscal policy actions in the United States may be con- strained by the high and rising level of federal govern- ment debt. A couple of participants saw macropruden- tial and regulatory policies as tools that could be used to mitigate the risk of financial imbalances inducing an eco- nomic downturn in which the ELB constrained the fed- eral funds rate. Participants generally agreed that both forward guidance and balance sheet actions would be effective tools to use if the federal funds rate were to become constrained by the ELB. In the Addendum to the Policy Normaliza- tion Principles and Plans statement issued in June 2017, the Committee indicated that it would be prepared to use its full range of tools, including altering the size and composition of its balance sheet, if future economic conditions were to warrant a more accommodative monetary policy than can be achieved solely by reducing the federal funds rate. However, participants acknowl- edged that there may be limits to the effectiveness of these tools in addressing an ELB episode. They also em- phasized that there was considerable uncertainty about the economic effects of these tools. Consistent with that view, a few participants noted that economic researchers had not yet reached a consensus about the effectiveness of unconventional policies. A number of participants indicated that there might be significant costs associated with the use of unconventional policies, and that these costs might limit, in particular, the extent to which the Committee should engage in large-scale asset purchases. Participants discussed the prominent role that previous communications about forward guidance and balance sheet actions, in conjunction with those policy measures, had in shaping public expectations about the potential future use of these tools and in determining their effec- tiveness. In general, advance communications about these policies were seen as important in reinforcing pub- lic understanding of the Committee’s commitment to achieving its dual-mandate objectives. However, several participants cautioned against being too specific about how the Committee would deploy such tools. In partic- ular, it was difficult to anticipate the forces that might push the economy into a recession, and thus preserving some flexibility in responding to an economic downturn could be appropriate. Moreover, although making mul- tiyear commitments regarding asset purchases or the fu- ture path of the federal funds rate could enhance the ef- fectiveness of these policies, such commitments could unduly constrain the choices of the Committee in the future. While the Committee’s current toolkit was judged to be effective, participants agreed, as a matter of prudent planning, to discuss their policy options further and to broaden the discussion to include the evaluation of po- tential alternative policy strategies for addressing the ELB. Building on their discussions at previous meet- ings, participants suggested that a number of possible al- ternatives might be worth consideration and agreed to return to this topic at future meetings. Several partici- pants indicated that it would be desirable to hold peri- odic and systematic reviews in which the Committee as- sessed the strengths and weaknesses of its current mon- etary policy framework. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) provided a summary of developments in do- Minutes of the Meeting of July 31–August 1, 2018_ Page 3 by policy recent announcements mestic and global financial markets over the intermeet- ing period. Asset prices were influenced by a number of factors, including reports concerning trade tensions among the United States and its major trading partners, foreign monetary policy developments, and data point- ing to strong growth momentum in the United States. Escalating trade tensions between China and the United States prompted notable market moves, particularly in foreign exchange markets. News on an agreement be- tween the United States and the European Union to con- tinue talks to resolve their trade disputes provided some support for global equity prices. The manager summa- the rized European Central Bank (ECB) and the Bank of Japan (BOJ). European yields moved lower following a revi- sion of the ECB’s forward guidance at its June meeting concerning asset purchases and the path of short-term rates. The Japanese yield curve steepened following re- ports that the BOJ may facilitate an increase in longer- term interest rates. At its July meeting, the BOJ an- nounced a number of changes with respect to forward guidance on its policy outlook, including its intention to keep interest rates low for an extended period. Mean- while, expectations concerning the path of monetary policy in the United States were little changed over the intermeeting period. Futures quotes indicated that mar- ket participants placed high odds on a further quarter- point firming in the federal funds rate at the September FOMC meeting. Responses to the Open Market Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Partic- ipants indicated that concerns about trade tensions had not affected the outlook for U.S. monetary policy. The deputy manager followed with a discussion of money markets and open market operations. Money market rates had moved up in line with the 20 basis point increase in the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate at the June meeting. Over the days following the June FOMC meeting, the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) moved up relative to the IOER rate, reportedly reflect- ing some special factors in the federal funds market, in- cluding increased demand for overnight funding by banks in connection with liquidity regulations and a pull- back by Federal Home Loan Banks in their lending in the federal funds market. These developments proved temporary, and the EFFR subsequently returned to a level about 4 basis points below the IOER rate. The deputy manager also discussed the Desk’s plans for small-value purchases of agency mortgage-backed secu- rities (MBS). The staff projected that principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency MBS would fall below the FOMC’s monthly redemption cap beginning in October. If principal payments followed this anticipated trajectory, the Desk planned to begin conducting monthly small-value purchases of agency MBS at that time to maintain operational readiness. The deputy manager also discussed the Federal Housing Fi- nance Agency’s Single Security Initiative, under which Uniform Mortgage-Backed Securities (UMBS) would be issued by both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac beginning in June 2019. The Desk planned to develop the capabil- ity to conduct UMBS transactions and, to more effi- ciently manage the portfolio, convert some portion of the SOMA’s existing agency MBS holdings to UMBS where appropriate. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the July 31–August 1 meeting indicated that labor market conditions contin- ued to strengthen in recent months and that real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a strong rate in the first half of the year. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), re- mained near 2 percent in June. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a strong pace again in June. The national unemployment rate moved up to 4.0 percent, but the labor force participa- tion rate rose by a similar amount, leaving the employ- ment-to-population ratio unchanged from May. The three-month moving averages of the unemployment rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics were each at or below the lows achieved during the previous expansion. The share of workers employed part time for economic reasons edged down to its lowest level since late 2007. The rate of private-sector job openings ticked down in May but remained elevated, while the rate of quits moved higher; initial claims for unemployment in- surance benefits continued to be low through mid-July. Recent readings showed that increases in hourly labor compensation stepped up modestly over the past year. The employment cost index for private workers in- creased 2.9 percent over the 12 months ending in June (compared with 2.4 percent over the same 12 months a year earlier), and average hourly earnings for all employ- ees rose 2.7 percent over that period (compared with Page 4 _Federal Open Market Committee 2.5 percent over the same 12 months a year earlier). (Data on compensation per hour that reflected the com- prehensive revision of the national income and product accounts by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) were not available at the time of the meeting.) Total industrial production was little changed, on net, from April to June despite solid increases in the output of the mining sector. Over the first half of the year, manufacturing production rose at a modest pace. Automakers’ assembly schedules suggested a sizable in- crease in light motor vehicle production in the third quarter, and broader indicators of manufacturing pro- duction, such as the new orders indexes from national and regional manufacturing surveys, pointed to solid gains in factory output in the near term. Real PCE rose briskly in the second quarter after a mod- est gain in the first quarter. Light motor vehicle sales maintained a robust pace in June, and indicators of ve- hicle demand were mixed but generally favorable. More broadly, recent readings on key factors that influence consumer spending—including gains in employment, real disposable personal income, and households’ net worth—continued to be supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. Consumer sentiment, as meas- ured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consum- ers, remained upbeat in June and July. Residential investment declined again in the second quarter. Starts for new single-family homes were little changed, on average, in May and June, but starts of mul- tifamily units declined on net. The issuance of building permits for both types of housing was lower in the sec- ond quarter than in the first quarter, which suggested that starts might move lower in coming months. Sales of existing homes edged down in May and June, while sales of new homes moved up on balance. Real private expenditures for business equipment and in- tellectual property rose at a moderate pace in the second quarter after a strong gain in the first quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding air- craft rose in May and June, and forward-looking indica- tors of business equipment spending—such as the back- log of unfilled capital goods orders, along with upbeat readings on business sentiment from national and re- gional surveys—continued to point to robust gains in equipment spending in the near term. Real business ex- penditures for nonresidential structures expanded at a solid pace again in the second quarter. However, the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation— an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—decreased slightly in recent weeks. Total real government purchases rose at a faster rate in the second quarter than in the first. Real federal defense and nondefense purchases both increased in the second quarter. Real purchases by state and local governments also moved higher; state and local government payrolls and construction spending by those governments in- creased in the second quarter. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in May, as exports, led by agricultural products (particularly soybeans) and capital goods, increased strongly and im- ports increased only modestly. In June, however, ad- vance data suggested that nominal goods exports fell and imports rose. All told, the BEA estimates that net ex- ports made a positive contribution of about 1 percentage point to real GDP growth in the second quarter after a near-zero contribution in the first. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 2.2 percent over the 12 months ending in June. Core PCE price inflation, which ex- cludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.9 percent over that same period. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2.9 percent over the 12 months ending in June, while core CPI inflation was 2.3 percent. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run infla- tion expectations—including those from the Michigan survey and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on balance. Incoming data suggested that foreign economic activity expanded at a moderate pace in the second quarter. Monthly indicators pointed to a pickup in the pace of economic activity in most advanced foreign economies (AFEs) following a temporary dip in the first quarter. However, real GDP growth remained moderate in the euro area and appeared to have slowed notably in many emerging market economies (EMEs), especially Mexico, from an unusually strong start to the year. Foreign in- flation fell in the second quarter, largely reflecting lower retail energy and food price inflation. Underlying infla- tion pressures in most foreign economies, especially in some AFEs, remained subdued. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Concerns regarding international trade policy weighed on market sentiment at times over the intermeeting pe- riod, prompting notable declines in some foreign equity markets but leaving only a modest imprint on domestic asset prices on net. Meanwhile, FOMC communications Minutes of the Meeting of July 31–August 1, 2018_ Page 5 were viewed by market participants as slightly less ac- commodative than expected, and domestic economic data releases were seen as mixed. On balance, market- based measures of the expected path of the federal funds rate through the end of 2019 edged up slightly. Yields on medium- and longer-term nominal Treasury securi- ties were little changed. The broad dollar index moved up. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses and households remained supportive of economic activ- ity on balance. Although the reactions of asset prices to FOMC com- munications during the period were generally modest, market participants reportedly interpreted the June FOMC statement and Summary of Economic Projec- tions (SEP) as somewhat less accommodative than ex- pected. The probability of an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate occurring at the August FOMC meeting, as implied by quotes on federal funds futures contracts, remained close to zero; the probability of an increase at the September FOMC meeting rose to about 90 percent by the end of the intermeeting period. Levels of the federal funds rate at the end of 2019 and 2020 implied by overnight index swap (OIS) rates edged up slightly on net. The nominal Treasury yield curve flattened somewhat during the intermeeting period. Measures of inflation compensation derived Inflation- Protected Securities were little changed on net. from Treasury Concerns about international trade disputes led to a slight decline in sentiment toward some domestic risky assets early in the period, but sentiment was buoyed later by positive corporate earnings releases for the second quarter. Broad U.S. equity price indexes displayed mixed results since the June FOMC meeting. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index at the one-month hori- zon—the VIX—was little changed, on net, and re- mained only a bit above the very low levels that prevailed before early February. Over the intermeeting period, spreads of yields on nonfinancial corporate bonds over those of comparable-maturity Treasury securities were little changed, on net, for both investment- and specula- tive-grade firms. These spreads remained low by histor- ical standards. Short-term funding markets functioned smoothly, and spreads of unsecured rates over comparable-maturity OIS rates continued to narrow during the intermeeting period. After the June FOMC meeting, the EFFR rose around 20 basis points, in line with the increase in the IOER rate, and traded well within the target range throughout the period. The dollar appreciated against most currencies, with the notable exception of the Mexican peso, which appreci- ated on some easing of investor concerns around pro- spective economic policies of the newly elected govern- ment. Escalating trade tensions contributed to an unu- sually sharp depreciation of the Chinese renminbi. Trade tensions also drove foreign equity prices lower, but there was a modest reversal late in the intermeeting period following an agreement between the United States and the European Union to hold off on tariff in- creases pending further negotiations. On net, equity prices were little changed in the AFEs, while they de- clined in the EMEs, led largely by a steep drop in China. Outflows from dedicated emerging market funds slowed, and EME sovereign bond spreads narrowed slightly. On balance, longer-term bond yields in the AFEs de- clined slightly over the intermeeting period. ECB com- munications following its June meeting were perceived as more accommodative than expected and led to a no- ticeable decline in market-based measures of policy rate expectations. The BOJ issued revised forward guidance at its July meeting indicating that it intends to maintain current low short- and long-term interest rates for an ex- tended period. Finally, the Bank of England held its pol- icy rate steady at its June meeting, but U.K. yields de- clined slightly amid ongoing Brexit-related concerns as well as lower-than-expected inflation data. Financing conditions for nonfinancial corporations con- tinued to be favorable over the intermeeting period. Gross issuance of corporate bonds and institutional lev- eraged loans picked up in May and stayed strong in June, with the rise in corporate bond issuance concentrated in the investment-grade segment of the market. Mean- while, the volume of equity issuance remained robust. Growth of outstanding commercial and industrial (C&I) loans held by banks was strong, on average, in June. Re- spondents to the June Senior Loan Officer Opinion Sur- vey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) reported that their institutions had eased standards and terms on C&I loans in the second quarter, most often citing increased competition from other lenders and increased ease of transacting in the secondary market as the reasons for doing so. Although some signs of deterioration emerged over the intermeeting period, the credit quality of nonfi- nancial corporations continued to be solid overall. The ratio of aggregate debt to assets in this sector stayed near multidecade highs. Gross issuance of municipal bonds in June was robust, continuing to increase from its slow start to the year. Page 6 _Federal Open Market Committee Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE) remained accommodative. CRE loans at banks main- tained solid growth over the past several quarters, with growth shared across all three major CRE loan catego- ries. On a weighted basis across all major CRE loan cat- egories, respondents to the June SLOOS reported that standards and demand for CRE loans continued to be unchanged, on the whole, over the second quarter. In- terest rate spreads on commercial mortgage-backed se- curities (CMBS) were little changed over the intermeet- ing period and remained near their post-crisis lows, while issuance of non-agency and agency CMBS main- tained a solid pace in the second quarter. Most borrowers in the residential mortgage market con- tinued to face accommodative financing conditions. For borrowers with low credit scores, credit conditions con- tinued to ease but stayed tight overall. Growth in home- purchase mortgages slowed a bit, and refinancing activ- ity continued to be muted over the past year, with both developments partly reflecting the rise in mortgage rates earlier this year. Relative to the June FOMC meeting, interest rates on 30-year conforming mortgages and yields on agency MBS were little changed. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets were little changed so far this year, on balance, and remained largely supportive of growth in household spending. Growth in consumer credit picked up in May from the more moderate pace seen earlier this year. Despite rising interest rates, financing rates remained low compared with historical levels, and recent household surveys indi- cated that consumers’ assessments of buying conditions for autos and other expensive durable goods were gen- erally positive. Credit supply conditions also continued to be largely supportive of spending. A moderate net fraction of July SLOOS respondents reported easing standards on auto loans over the previous three months after several quarters in which banks had reported tight- ening standards. However, a significant net fraction of banks reportedly continued to tighten standards for credit card accounts. The staff provided its latest report on potential risks to financial stability; the report again characterized the fi- nancial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as moderate on balance. This overall assessment incorpo- rated the staff’s judgment that vulnerabilities associated with asset valuation pressures continued to be elevated, with no major asset class exhibiting valuations below their historical midpoints. Additionally, the staff judged vulnerabilities from financial-sector leverage and ma- turity and liquidity transformation to be low, vulnerabil- ities from household leverage as being in the low-to- moderate range, and vulnerabilities from leverage in the nonfinancial business sector as elevated. Staff Economic Outlook In the U.S. economic forecast prepared for this FOMC meeting, the staff continued to project that the economy would expand at an above-trend pace. Real GDP was forecast to increase in the second half of this year at a pace that was just a little slower than in the first half of the year. Over the 2018–20 period, output was projected to rise further above the staff’s estimate of potential out- put, and the unemployment rate was projected to decline further below the staff’s estimate of the longer-run nat- ural rate. However, with labor market conditions already tight, the staff continued to assume that the projected decline in the unemployment rate will be attenuated by a greater-than-usual cyclical improvement in the labor force participation rate. Relative to the forecast pre- pared for the June meeting, the projection for real GDP growth was revised up a little, primarily in response to stronger incoming data on household spending. In ad- dition, the staff continued to anticipate that supply con- straints might restrain output growth somewhat in the medium term. The unemployment rate was projected to be a little higher over the next few quarters than in the previous forecast, but it was essentially unrevised there- after. The staff forecast for total PCE price inflation in 2018 was revised down a little, mainly because of a slower- than-expected increase in consumer energy prices in the second quarter and a downward revision to the forecast for energy price inflation in the second half of this year. The staff continued to project that total PCE inflation would remain near the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term and that core PCE price inflation would run slightly higher than total inflation over that period because of a projected decline in consumer en- ergy prices in 2019 and 2020. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the upside, household spending and business investment could ex- pand faster over the next few years than the staff pro- jected, supported in part by the tax cuts enacted last year. On the downside, trade policies could move in a direc- tion that would have significant negative effects on eco- nomic growth. Another possibility was that recent fiscal Minutes of the Meeting of July 31–August 1, 2018_ Page 7 policy actions could produce less of a boost to aggregate demand than assumed in the baseline projection, as the current tightness of resource utilization may result in smaller multiplier effects than would be typical at other points in the business cycle. Risks to the inflation pro- jection also were seen as balanced. The upside risk that inflation could increase more than expected in an econ- omy that was projected to move further above its poten- tial was counterbalanced by the downside risk that longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than was assumed in the staff forecast. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of the economic situation and the outlook, meeting participants agreed that information received since the FOMC met in June indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that eco- nomic activity had been rising at a strong rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had stayed low. Household spend- ing and business fixed investment had grown strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and core in- flation, which excludes changes in food and energy prices, had remained near 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed, on balance. Participants generally noted that economic growth in the second quarter had been strong; incoming data indicated considerable momentum in spending by households and businesses. Several participants stressed the possibility that real GDP growth in the second quarter may have been boosted by transitory factors, including an outsized increase in U.S. exports. For the second half of the year, participants generally expected that GDP growth would likely slow from its second-quarter rate but would still exceed that of potential output. Participants noted a number of favorable economic factors that were sup- porting above-trend GDP growth; these included a strong labor market, stimulative federal tax and spending policies, accommodative financial conditions, and con- tinued high levels of household and business confidence. Participants generally viewed the risks to the economic outlook as roughly balanced. Reports from business contacts confirmed a robust pace of expansion in several sectors of the economy, includ- ing energy, manufacturing, and services. Crude oil pro- duction was reported as having grown rapidly. In con- trast to other sectors, residential construction activity ap- peared to have softened somewhat, possibly reflecting declining home affordability, higher mortgage rates, scarcity of available lots in certain cities, and delays in building approvals. However, a couple of participants reported vibrancy in industrial and multifamily construc- tion activity. Business contacts in various sectors had cited labor shortages and other supply constraints as im- pediments to production. Furthermore, recent tariff in- creases had put upward pressure on input prices. Busi- ness contacts in a few Districts reported that uncertainty regarding trade policy had led to some reductions or de- lays in their investment spending. Nonetheless, a num- ber of participants indicated that most businesses con- cerned about trade disputes had not yet cut back their capital expenditures or hiring but might do so if trade tensions were not resolved soon. Several participants observed that the agricultural sector had been adversely affected by significant declines in crop and livestock prices over the intermeeting period. A couple of partic- ipants noted that this development likely partly flowed from trade tensions. Participants agreed that labor market conditions had strengthened further over the intermeeting period. Pay- rolls had grown strongly in June, and labor market tight- ness was reflected in recent readings on rates of private- sector job openings and quits and on job-to-job switch- ing by workers. Although the unemployment rate in- creased slightly in June, this increase was accompanied by an uptick in the labor force participation rate. Many participants commented on the fact that measures of aggregate nominal wage growth had so far picked up only modestly. Among the factors cited as containing the pickup in wage growth were low trend productivity growth, lags in the response of nominal wage growth to resource pressures, and improvements in the terms of employment that were not recorded in the wage data. Alternatively, the recent pace of nominal wage growth might indicate continued slack in the labor market. However, some participants expected a pickup in aggre- gate nominal wage growth to occur before long, with a number of participants reporting that wage pressures in their Districts were rising or that firms now exhibited greater willingness to grant wage increases. Participants noted that both overall inflation and infla- tion for items other than food and energy remained near 2 percent on a 12-month basis. A few participants ex- pressed increased confidence that the recent return of inflation to near the Committee’s longer-term 2 percent objective would be sustained. Several participants com- mented that increases in the prices of particular goods, such as those induced by the tariff increases, would likely Page 8 _Federal Open Market Committee be one source of short-term upward pressure on the in- flation rate, although offsetting influences—including the negative effects that trade developments were having on agricultural prices—were also noted. Reports from several Districts suggested that firms had greater scope than in the recent past to raise prices in response to strong demand or increases in input costs, including those associated with tariff increases and recent rises in fuel and freight expenses. Many participants anticipated that, over the medium term, high levels of resource utilization and stable inflation expectations would keep inflation near 2 percent. However, some participants observed that inflation in recent years had shown only a weak connection to measures of resource pressures or indicated that they would like to see further evidence that measures of underlying inflation or readings on in- flation expectations were on course to attain levels con- sistent with sustained achievement of the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. Although a few participants observed that the trimmed mean measure of inflation calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dal- las was still below 2 percent, a couple noted forecasts that this measure would reach 2 percent by the end of the year. Some participants raised the concern that a prolonged period in which the economy operated be- yond potential could give rise to inflationary pressures or to financial imbalances that could eventually trigger an economic downturn. Participants commented on a number of risks and un- certainties associated with their outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation over the medium term. They generally continued to see fiscal policy and the strengthening of the labor market as supportive of economic growth in the near term. Some noted larger or more persistent positive effects of these factors as an upside risk to the outlook. A few participants indicated, however, that a faster-than-expected fading of the fiscal impetus or a greater-than-anticipated subsequent fiscal tightening constituted a downside risk. In addition, all participants pointed to ongoing trade disagreements and proposed trade measures as an important source of un- certainty and risks. Participants observed that if a large- scale and prolonged dispute over trade policies devel- oped, there would likely be adverse effects on business investment spending, and employment. sentiment, Moreover, wide-ranging tariff increases would also re- duce the purchasing power of U.S. households. Further negative effects in such a scenario could include reduc- tions in productivity and disruptions of supply chains. Other downside risks cited included the possibility of a significant weakening in the housing sector, a sharp in- crease in oil prices, or a severe slowdown in EMEs. Participants remarked on the extent to which financial conditions remained supportive of economic expansion. Over the intermeeting period, only a small change in overall financial conditions occurred, with modest movements on net in equity prices and in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. The yield curve had flat- tened further over the intermeeting period. Participants who commented on financial stability noted that asset valuations remained elevated and corporate borrowing terms remained easy. They also noted that regulatory changes introduced in the past decade had helped to reduce the susceptibility of the financial sector to runs and to strengthen the capital positions of banks and other financial institutions. In discussing the capital positions of large banks, a few participants emphasized that financial stability risks could be reduced if these in- stitutions further boosted their capital cushions while their profits are strong and the economic outlook is fa- vorable; arguments for and against the activation of the countercyclical capital buffer as a means of further strengthening the capital positions of large banks were discussed in this context. In their consideration of monetary policy, participants discussed the implications of recent economic and finan- cial developments for the economic outlook and the as- sociated risks to that outlook. Participants remarked on recent above-trend growth in real GDP and on indica- tors of resource utilization. Some commented that con- sumer spending had been quite strong in the second quarter, confirming their impressions that the first-quar- ter weakness had been temporary. Several participants also pointed to the continued strength in business fixed investment, although the persistent weakness and the risk of a further slowdown in residential investment were also noted. A few participants suggested there could still be some labor market slack, citing recent increases in la- bor force participation rates relative to prevailing demo- graphically driven downward trends; the participation rate of prime-age men, in particular, was still below its previous business cycle peak. Other participants judged that labor market conditions were tight, pointing to other data, including job quits and openings rates, and anecdotes from contacts. Participants generally characterized inflation as running close to the Committee’s objective of 2 percent, and most of those who expressed a view indicated that recent readings on inflation had come in close to their expecta- tions. Consistent with their SEP submissions in June, Minutes of the Meeting of July 31–August 1, 2018_ Page 9 several participants remarked that inflation, measured on a 12-month basis, was likely to move modestly above the Committee’s objective for a time. Others pointed to some indicators suggesting that long-term inflation ex- pectations could be below levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. Participants generally judged that the current stance of monetary policy remained accommodative, supporting strong labor market conditions and inflation of around 2 percent. Participants agreed that it would be appropri- ate for the Committee to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting. With regard to the medium term, various participants in- dicated that information gathered since the Committee met in June had not significantly altered their outlook for the U.S. economy. Many participants suggested that if incoming data continued to support their current eco- nomic outlook, it would likely soon be appropriate to take another step in removing policy accommodation. Participants generally expected that further gradual in- creases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with a sustained expansion of eco- nomic activity, strong labor market conditions, and in- flation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec- tive over the medium term. Many participants reiterated that the actual path for the federal funds rate would ulti- mately depend on the incoming data and on how those data affect the economic outlook. Participants discussed the economic forces and risks they saw as providing the rationale for gradual increases in the federal funds rate as well as scenarios that might cause them to depart from this expected path. Among other factors, they pointed to uncertainty about the ap- propriate level of the federal funds rate over the longer run and to constraints on the provision of monetary ac- commodation during ELB episodes as reasons for pro- ceeding gradually in the removal of accommodation. Some participants noted that stronger underlying mo- mentum in the economy was an upside risk; most ex- pressed the view that an escalation in international trade disputes was a potentially consequential downside risk for real activity. Some participants suggested that, in the event of a major escalation in trade disputes, the com- plex nature of trade issues, including the entire range of their effects on output and inflation, presented a chal- lenge in determining the appropriate monetary policy re- sponse. Participants also discussed the possible implications of a flattening in the term structure of market interest rates. Several participants cited statistical evidence for the United States that inversions of the yield curve have of- ten preceded recessions. They suggested that policy- makers should pay close attention to the slope of the yield curve in assessing the economic and policy outlook. Other participants emphasized that inferring economic causality from statistical correlations was not appropri- ate. A number of global factors were seen as contrib- uting to downward pressure on term premiums, includ- ing central bank asset purchase programs and the strong worldwide demand for safe assets. In such an environ- ment, an inversion of the yield curve might not have the significance that the historical record would suggest; the signal to be taken from the yield curve needed to be con- sidered in the context of other economic and financial indicators. A couple of participants commented on issues related to the operating framework for the implementation of monetary policy, including, among other things, the im- plications of changes in financial market regulations for the demand for reserves and for the size and composi- tion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. These par- ticipants judged that it would be important for the Com- mittee to resume its discussion of operating frameworks before too long. The Chairman suggested that the Com- mittee would likely resume a discussion of operating frameworks in the fall. Many participants noted that it would likely be appropri- ate in the not-too-distant future to revise the Commit- tee’s characterization of the stance of monetary policy in its postmeeting statement. They agreed that the state- ment’s language that “the stance of monetary policy re- mains accommodative” would, at some point fairly soon, no longer be appropriate. Participants noted that the federal funds rate was moving closer to the range of estimates of its neutral level. A number of participants emphasized the considerable uncertainty in estimates of the neutral rate of interest, stemming from sources such as fiscal policy and large-scale asset purchase programs. Against this background, continuing to provide an ex- plicit assessment of the federal funds rate relative to its neutral level could convey a false sense of precision. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the FOMC met in June indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a strong rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate had stayed low. Household spending and business fixed investment had grown strongly. On a Page 10 _Federal Open Market Committee 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remained near 2 per- cent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed, on balance. Policymakers viewed the recent data as indicating that the outlook for the economy was evolving about as they had expected. Consequently, members expected that further gradual increases in the target range for the fed- eral funds rate would be consistent with sustained ex- pansion of economic activity, strong labor market con- ditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. Members continued to judge that the risks to the economic out- look appeared roughly balanced. After assessing the incoming data, current conditions, and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1¾ to 2 percent. They noted that the stance of monetary policy remained ac- commodative, thereby supporting strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate would depend on their assessments of realized and ex- pected economic conditions relative to the objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. They re- iterated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and in- ternational developments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective August 2, 2018, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1¾ to 2 percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol- iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer- ing rate of 1.75 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-coun- terparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each cal- endar month that exceeds $24 billion, and to re- invest in agency mortgage-backed securities the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during each calendar month that exceeds $16 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been strong, on av- erage, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Household spending and business fixed investment have grown strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remain near 2 percent. Indicators of longer- term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective over the medium term. Risks to the eco- nomic outlook appear roughly balanced. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee de- cided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1¾ to 2 percent. The stance of remains accommodative, monetary policy Minutes of the Meeting of July 31–August 1, 2018_ Page 11 thereby supporting strong labor market condi- tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla- tion. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Wil- liams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael Brainard, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Ran- dal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: None. Ms. George voted as alternate member at this meeting. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un- changed at 1.95 percent and voted unanimously to ap- prove establishment of the primary credit rate (discount rate) at the existing level of 2½ percent, effective Au- gust 2, 2018.6 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, September 25– 26, 2018. The meeting adjourned at 9:45 a.m. on Au- gust 1, 2018. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on July 3, 2018, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on June 12–13, 2018. _____________________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 6 The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and sea- sonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates. Page 12 _Federal Open Market Committee 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee September 25–26, 2018 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 25, 2018, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, Septem- ber 26, 2018, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman John C. Williams, Vice Chairman Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively Mark A. Gould, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Mary C. Daly, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jennifer L. Burns, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Eric M. Engen, Joshua Gallin, and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Ellen E. Meade, Edward Nelson, and Joyce K. Zickler,3 Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. 3 Attended opening remarks for Tuesday session only. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors David López-Salido, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Stacey Tevlin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Eric C. Engstrom, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, and Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,4 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Jeffrey Huther, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Benjamin K. Johannsen, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Gregory L. Stefani, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Michael Dotsey and Geoffrey Tootell, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Boston, respectively Edward S. Knotek II, Spencer Krane, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Chicago, and Minneapolis, respectively Jonathan P. McCarthy and Jonathan L. Willis, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Kansas City, respectively William Dupor, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Jim Dolmas, Senior Research Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 4 Attended Tuesday session only. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) discussed U.S. and global financial develop- ments. In global markets, strains in emerging market economies (EMEs) contributed to volatility in currency and equity markets over the period. In addition, con- cerns about trade tensions between the United States and China were the focus of a great deal of attention among market participants. Such concerns led the Shanghai Composite index to drop as much as 8 percent at one point over the intermeeting period before recov- ering somewhat. The renminbi, however, was relatively stable, reportedly in part because investors believed that Chinese authorities were prepared to take measures to counter significant renminbi depreciation. Regarding domestic financial markets, the manager noted that U.S. equity markets had posted strong gains, spurred by optimism regarding the U.S. economic out- look and rising corporate earnings. Longer-term Treas- ury yields moved higher, and market-based measures of the expected path of the funds rate edged up. According to the Open Market Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants, a 25 basis point in- crease in the target range for the federal funds rate at the September meeting was widely expected; moreover, in- vestors appeared to be placing high odds on a further quarter-point policy firming at the December meeting. In U.S. money markets, the spread between the three- month London interbank offered rate and three-month overnight index swap (OIS) rates continued to narrow. The widening in that spread earlier in the year appeared to reflect an especially rapid run-up in Treasury bill sup- ply. Treasury bill supply remained elevated and report- edly continued to contribute to upward pressure on overnight repurchase agreement (repo) rates. The rela- tively high level of repo rates was associated with con- tinued very modest take-up in the Federal Reserve’s overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) op- erations. Elevated repo rates may also have contributed to the relatively tight spread between the interest on ex- cess reserves (IOER) rate and the effective federal funds rate. That spread stood at 3 basis points over much of the period and seemed likely to narrow to 2 basis points in the near future. As yet, there were no signs that the upward pressure on the federal funds rate relative to the IOER rate was due to scarcity of aggregate reserves in the banking system. The level of reserves in the banking system temporarily dipped sharply in mid-September in connection with a sizable inflow of tax receipts to the Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Treasury’s account at the Federal Reserve; however, that reduction in reserves in the banking system did not seem to have any effect on the federal funds market or the effective federal funds rate. In reviewing Federal Reserve operations, the manager noted that market reaction to the ongoing reduction in the System’s holdings of Treasury and agency securities had been muted to date. With the increase in the caps on redemptions to be implemented beginning in Octo- ber, reinvestment of Treasury securities would occur al- most exclusively in the middle month of each quarter in connection with the Treasury’s midquarter refunding auctions. Under the baseline path for interest rates, the Federal Reserve’s reinvestments of principal payments on agency mortgage-backed securities would likely fall to zero beginning in October; however, prepayments could rise somewhat above the redemption cap in some months in the future given the uncertainties surrounding prepayment projections. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the September 25–26 meeting indicated that labor market conditions contin- ued to strengthen in recent months and that real gross domestic product (GDP) appeared to be rising at a strong rate in the third quarter, similar to its pace in the first half of the year. The flooding and damage from Hurricane Florence, which made landfall on Septem- ber 14, seemed likely to have a modest, transitory effect on national economic growth in the second half of the year. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for per- sonal consumption expenditures (PCE), remained near 2 percent in July. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. Total nonfarm payroll employment increased at a strong pace, on average, in July and August. The national un- employment rate decreased to 3.9 percent in July and re- mained at that level in August, while the labor force par- ticipation rate and the employment-to-population ratio moved down somewhat, on balance, over those two months. The unemployment rates for African Ameri- cans, Asians, and Hispanics in August were below their levels at the end of the previous expansion. The share of workers employed part time for economic reasons de- clined further to below its level in late 2007. The rate of private-sector job openings continued to be elevated in June and July, while the rate of quits moved higher on balance; initial claims for unemployment insurance ben- efits were at a historically low level in mid-September. Total labor compensation per hour in the nonfarm busi- ness sector increased 3.3 percent over the four quarters ending in the second quarter, and average hourly earn- ings for all employees rose 2.9 percent over the 12 months ending in August. Industrial production expanded at a solid pace in July and August. Automakers’ assembly schedules suggested that light motor vehicle production would be roughly flat in the fourth quarter, although broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as the new orders in- dexes from national and regional manufacturing surveys, pointed to further solid gains in factory output in the near term. Real PCE appeared to be rising strongly in the third quarter. Retail sales increased somewhat in August, and the data for July were revised up to show a sizable gain. However, the rate of light motor vehicle sales moved down in July and August from the robust pace in the second quarter. The staff’s preliminary assessment was that the consequences of Hurricane Florence would have a slight negative effect on aggregate real PCE growth in the third quarter but that spending would bounce back in the fourth quarter. More broadly, recent readings on key factors that influence consumer spend- ing—including gains in employment, real disposable personal income, and households’ net worth—contin- ued to be supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. Moreover, consumer sentiment, as measured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, remained upbeat in August and early September. Real residential investment looked to be declining fur- ther in the third quarter. Starts for new single-family homes and multifamily units were, on average, below their second-quarter rates in July and August. The issu- ance of building permits for both types of housing stepped down, on net, over those two months, which suggested that starts might move lower in coming months. Sales of both new and existing homes declined somewhat in July, and existing home sales were flat in August. Growth in real private expenditures for business equip- ment and intellectual property appeared to be moderat- ing a little in the third quarter following strong gains in expenditures in the first half of the year. Nominal ship- ments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft rose briskly in July, although spending for transportation Minutes of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ equipment investment moved down in recent months. Forward-looking indicators of business equipment spending—such as increases in new and unfilled capital goods orders, along with upbeat readings on business sentiment from national and regional surveys—pointed to robust gains in equipment spending in the near term. Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential struc- tures outside of the drilling and mining sector declined in July, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—held about steady in recent weeks. Total real government purchases looked to be rising fur- ther in the third quarter. Nominal defense spending in July and August was consistent with continued increases in real federal purchases. Real expenditures by state and local governments appeared to be roughly flat, as state and local government payrolls decreased slightly in July and August, while nominal construction spending by these governments rose modestly in July. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in June and July, with declining exports and rising imports. The decline in exports largely reflected lower exports of capital goods, while greater imports of industrial supplies boosted overall imports. The available data suggested that the change in net exports would be a notable drag on real GDP growth in the third quarter. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in July. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 2.0 percent over that same period. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2.7 percent over the 12 months ending in August, while core CPI inflation was 2.2 percent. Re- cent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations—including those from the Michi- gan survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on balance. Foreign economic growth slowed in the second quarter, as a pickup in growth for the advanced foreign econo- mies (AFEs) was more than offset by slower growth in the EMEs. Incoming indicators for the AFEs pointed to some moderation in the pace of growth in the third quarter, especially for Canada and Japan, while indica- tors for the EMEs suggested a pickup in many countries from the unusually slow pace of the second quarter. Foreign inflation had risen a bit recently, boosted by higher oil prices and, in the EMEs, higher food prices and recent currency depreciation. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Nominal Treasury yields increased over the intermeeting period, as market reactions to domestic economic data releases that were, on balance, slightly stronger than ex- pected appeared to outweigh ongoing concerns about trade policy and negative developments in some EMEs. FOMC communications over the period were largely in line with expectations and elicited little market reaction. Domestic stock prices rose, buoyed in part by positive news about corporate earnings, while foreign equity in- dexes declined and the broad dollar index moved up. Fi- nancing conditions for nonfinancial businesses and households remained supportive of economic activity on balance. Global financial markets were volatile during the inter- meeting period amid significant stress in some EMEs, ongoing focus on Brexit and on fiscal policy in Italy, and continued trade tensions. On balance, the dollar was lit- tle changed against AFE currencies and appreciated against EME currencies, as financial pressures on some EMEs weighed on broader risk sentiment. Turkey and Argentina experienced significant stress, and other countries with similar macroeconomic vulnerabilities also came under pressure. There were small outflows from dedicated emerging market funds, and EME sov- ereign bond spreads widened. Trade tensions weighed on foreign equity prices, as the United States continued its trade negotiations with Canada and placed additional tariffs on Chinese products. FOMC communications elicited limited price reactions in financial markets over the intermeeting period, and market-implied measures of monetary policy expecta- tions were little changed. The probability of an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate occurring at the September FOMC meeting, as implied by quotes on the federal funds futures contracts, increased to near cer- tainty. The market-implied probability of an additional rate increase at the December FOMC meeting rose to about 75 percent. The market-implied path for the fed- eral funds rate beyond 2018 increased a touch. Evolving trade-related risks and other international de- velopments reportedly weighed somewhat on market sentiment. However, domestic economic data releases came in a bit above market expectations, on net, with the stronger-than-expected average hourly earnings in the August employment report notably boosting Treasury yields. Nominal Treasury yields moved up over the in- termeeting period, with the 10-year yield rising above 3 percent. Measures of inflation compensation derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities over the Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ next 5 years ticked up and were little changed 5 to 10 years ahead. over the intermeeting period and stayed near their post- crisis lows. Broad U.S. equity price indexes increased about 4 per- cent since the August FOMC meeting, as positive news about corporate earnings and the domestic economy outweighed negative international developments. Stock prices increased for many sectors in the S&P 500 index, as the second-quarter earnings reports for firms that re- ported later in the earnings cycle came in strong. How- ever, concerns about economic prospects abroad—par- ticularly with respect to trade policy and China—ap- peared to weigh on stocks in the energy and basic mate- rials sectors, which declined. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index at the one-month horizon—the VIX—moved down but remained somewhat above the extremely low levels seen in late 2017. Spreads of invest- ment- and speculative-grade corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury yields narrowed a bit on net. Short-term funding markets functioned smoothly over the intermeeting period. An elevated level of Treasury bills outstanding, following heavy issuance this summer, continued to put upward pressure on money market rates and reduced the attractiveness of the Federal Re- serve’s ON RRP facility. Take-up at the facility averaged $2.9 billion per day over the intermeeting period. Spreads of unsecured funding rates over comparable- maturity OIS rates continued to retrace the rise in spreads recorded earlier this year. On balance, financing conditions for large nonfinancial firms remained accommodative in recent months. De- mand for corporate borrowing appeared to have de- clined, in part because of strong earnings, rising interest rates, and seasonal factors. In July and August, gross issuance of corporate bonds was relatively weak, while commercial and industrial loan growth moderated. Meanwhile, the pace of equity issuance was solid in July but fell in August, reflecting seasonal factors. Financing conditions for small businesses remained favorable, and survey-based measures of credit demand among small business owners showed signs of strengthening, al- though demand was still weak relative to pre-crisis levels. Gross issuance of municipal bonds continued to be solid. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions also remained accommodative. Although CRE loan growth at banks moderated in July and Au- gust, issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) was robust. CMBS spreads were little changed Residential mortgage financing conditions remained ac- commodative on balance. For borrowers with low credit scores, however, conditions were still somewhat tight despite continued easing in credit availability. Re- financing activity continued to be muted in recent months, and the growth in purchase mortgage origina- tions slowed a bit relative to year-earlier levels, in part reflecting the notable increase in mortgage rates earlier this year. On net, financing conditions in consumer credit markets were little changed in recent months and remained largely supportive of growth in household spending. However, the supply of credit to consumers with sub- prime credit scores remained tight. More broadly, al- though interest rates for credit cards and auto loans con- tinued to rise, consumer credit expanded at a solid pace. Staff Economic Outlook In the U.S. economic forecast prepared for the Septem- ber FOMC meeting, real GDP was projected to increase in the second half of this year at a rate that was just a little slower than in the first half of the year. The staff’s preliminary assessment was that the effects of Hurricane Florence would lead to a slight reduction in real GDP growth in the third quarter and a small addition to growth in the fourth quarter as economic activity re- turned to more normal levels and some disrupted activ- ity was made up. Over the 2018–20 period, output was projected to rise at a rate above or at the staff’s estimate of potential growth and then slow to a pace below it in 2021. The unemployment rate was projected to decline further below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natu- ral rate but to bottom out in 2020 and begin to edge up in 2021. Relative to the forecast prepared for the previ- ous meeting, the projection for real GDP growth this year was revised up a little, primarily in response to stronger-than-expected incoming data on household spending and business investment. The projection for the medium term was not materially changed, in part be- cause the recently enacted tariffs on Chinese goods and the retaliatory actions of China were judged to have only a small net effect on U.S. real GDP growth over the next few years. In addition, the staff continued to anticipate that supply constraints might restrain output growth somewhat in the medium term. The unemployment rate was projected to be a little lower over the medium term than in the previous forecast, partly in response to the staff’s assessment that the natural rate of unemployment was a bit lower than previously assumed. With labor market conditions already tight, the staff continued to Minutes of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ assume that projected employment gains would manifest in smaller-than-usual downward pressure on the unem- ployment rate and in larger-than-usual upward pressure on the labor force participation rate. The staff forecast for total PCE price inflation in 2018 was revised up slightly, mainly because of a faster-than- expected increase in consumer energy prices in the sec- ond half. The staff continued to project that total PCE inflation would remain near the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term and that core PCE price inflation would run slightly higher than total inflation over that period because of a projected decline in con- sumer energy prices in 2019 through 2021. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff also saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the upside, household spending and business investment could expand faster than the staff projected, supported in part by the tax cuts enacted last year. On the down- side, trade policies and foreign economic developments could move in directions that have significant negative effects on U.S. economic growth. Risks to the inflation projection also were seen as balanced. The upside risk that inflation could increase more than expected in an economy that was projected to move further above its potential was counterbalanced by the downside risk that longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than was assumed in the staff forecast. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2018 through 2021 and over the longer run, based on their individual assess- ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each partici- pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- priate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. These projections are described in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which is an addendum to these minutes. In their discussion of the economic situation and the outlook, meeting participants agreed that information received since the FOMC met in August indicated that the labor market continued to strengthen and that eco- nomic activity rose at a strong rate. Job gains were strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate stayed low. Recent data suggested that house- hold spending and business fixed investment grew strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy re- mained near 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term infla- tion expectations were little changed on balance. Meeting participants noted that a number of communi- ties suffered devastating losses associated with Hurri- cane Florence. Despite the magnitude of the storm- related destruction, participants expected the imprint on the level of overall economic activity at the national level to be relatively modest, consistent with the experience following several previous major storms. Based on recent readings on spending, employment, and inflation, almost all participants saw little change in their assessment of the economic outlook, although a few of them judged that recent data pointed to a pace of eco- nomic activity that was stronger than they had expected earlier this year. Participants noted a number of favora- ble economic factors that were supporting above-trend GDP growth; these included strong labor market condi- tions, stimulative federal tax and spending policies, ac- commodative financial conditions, solid household bal- ance sheets, and continued high levels of household and business confidence. A number of participants observed that the stimulative effects of the changes in fiscal policy would likely diminish over the next several years. A cou- ple of participants commented that recent strong growth in GDP may also be due in part to increases in the growth rate of the economy’s productive capacity. In their discussion of the household sector, participants generally characterized consumption growth as strong, and they judged that robust increases in disposable in- come, high levels of consumer confidence, and solid household balance sheets had contributed to the strength in spending. Several participants noted that the household saving rate had been revised up significantly in the most recent estimates published by the Bureau of Economic Activity. A few of those participants re- marked that the upward revision in the saving rate could be viewed as evidence of the strength of the financial position of the household sector and could be a factor that would further support solid expansion of consump- tion spending. However, a couple of participants noted that the higher saving rate may not be a precursor to higher future consumption growth. For example, the higher saving rate may indicate some greater caution on the part of consumers, greater inequality of income and Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ wealth—which would imply a lower aggregate propen- sity to spend—or changing consumer behavior in a low interest rate environment. With regard to residential in- vestment, a few participants noted weak residential con- struction activity at the national or District level, which was attributed in part to higher interest rates or supply constraints. Participants noted that business fixed investment had grown strongly so far this year. A few commented that recent changes in federal tax policy had likely bolstered investment spending. Contacts in most sectors re- mained optimistic about their business prospects, and surveys of manufacturing activity were broadly favora- ble. Despite this optimism, a number of contacts cited factors that were causing them to forego production or investment opportunities in some cases, including labor shortages and uncertainty regarding trade policy. In par- ticular, tariffs on aluminum and steel were cited as re- ducing new investment in the energy sector. Contacts also suggested that firms were attempting to diversify the set of countries with which they trade—both imports and exports—as a result of uncertainty over tariff policy. Contacts in the agricultural industry reported that tariffs imposed by China had resulted in lower crop prices, fur- ther depressing incomes in that sector, although a new federal program was expected to offset some income losses. In their discussion of labor markets, participants gener- ally agreed that conditions continued to strengthen. Contacts in many Districts reported tight labor markets, with difficulty finding qualified workers. In some cases, firms were coping with labor shortages by increasing sal- aries, benefits, or workplace amenities in order to attract and retain workers. Other business contacts facing labor shortages were responding by increasing training for less-qualified workers. For the economy overall, partic- ipants generally agreed that, on balance, recent data sug- gested some acceleration in labor costs, but that wage growth remained moderate by historical standards, which was due in part to tepid productivity growth. Regarding inflation, participants noted that on a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remained near 2 per- cent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed on balance. In general, participants viewed recent consumer price developments as con- sistent with their expectation that inflation was on a tra- jectory to achieve the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective on a sustained basis. Several participants com- mented that inflation may modestly exceed 2 percent for a period of time. Reports from business contacts and surveys in a number of Districts also indicated some firming in inflationary pressures. In particular, some contacts indicated that input prices had been bolstered by strong demand or import tariffs. Moreover, several participants reported that firms in their Districts that were facing higher input prices because of tariffs per- ceived that they had an increased ability to raise the prices of their products. A couple of participants em- phasized that because inflation had run below the Com- mittee’s 2 percent objective for the past several years, some measures of trend inflation or longer-term infla- tion expectations were below levels consistent with the 2 percent objective; these participants judged that a modest increase in inflation expectations would be im- portant for achieving the inflation objective on a sus- tained basis. In their discussion of developments in financial markets, a number of participants noted that financial conditions remained accommodative: The rise in interest rates and appreciation of the dollar over the intermeeting period had been offset by increases in equity prices, and broader measures continued to point to accommodative financial conditions. Some participants commented about the continued growth in leveraged loans, the loosening of terms and standards on these loans, or the growth of this activity in the nonbank sector as reasons to remain mindful of vulnerabilities and possible risks to financial stability. Participants commented on a number of risks and un- certainties associated with their outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation over the medium term. Participants generally agreed that risks to the out- look appeared roughly balanced. Some participants commented that trade policy developments remained a source of uncertainty for the outlook for domestic growth and inflation. The divergence between domestic and foreign economic growth prospects and monetary policies was cited as presenting a downside risk because of the potential for further strengthening of the U.S. dol- lar; some participants noted that financial stresses in a few EMEs could pose additional risks if they were to spread more broadly through the global economy and financial markets. With regard to upside risks, partici- pants variously noted that high consumer confidence, accommodative financial conditions, or greater-than- expected effects of fiscal stimulus could lead to stronger- than-expected economic outcomes. Tightening re- source utilization and an increasing ability of firms to raise output prices were cited as factors that could lead to higher-than-expected inflation, while lower-than- expected growth, a strengthening of the U.S. dollar, or Minutes of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ inflation expectations persistently running below 2 per- cent were mentioned as risks that could lead to lower inflation. A few participants offered perspectives on the term structure of interest rates and what a potential inversion of the yield curve might signal about economic pro- spects in light of the historical regularity that an inverted yield curve has often preceded the onset of recessions in the United States. On the one hand, an inverted yield curve could indicate an increased risk of recession; on the other hand, the low level of term premiums in recent years—reflecting, in part, central bank asset purchases— could temper the reliability of the slope of the yield curve as an indicator of future economic activity. In addition, the recent rise and possible further increases in longer- term interest rates might diminish the likelihood that the yield curve would invert in the near term. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants generally judged that the economy was evolving about as anticipated, with real economic activ- ity rising at a strong rate, labor market conditions con- tinuing to strengthen, and inflation near the Committee’s objective. Based on their current assessments, all partic- ipants expressed the view that it would be appropriate for the Committee to continue its gradual approach to policy firming by raising the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting. Almost all considered that it was also appropriate to revise the Committee’s postmeeting statement in order to remove the language stating that “the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative.” Participants discussed a number of reasons for removing the language at this time, noting that the Committee would not be signaling a change in the expected path for policy, particularly as the target range for the federal funds rate announced af- ter the Committee’s meeting would still be below all of the estimates of its longer-run level submitted in the Sep- tember SEP. In addition, waiting until the target range for the federal funds rate had been increased further to remove the characterization of the policy stance as “ac- commodative” could convey a false sense of precision in light of the considerable uncertainty surrounding all es- timates of the neutral federal funds rate. With regard to the outlook for monetary policy beyond this meeting, participants generally anticipated that fur- ther gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would most likely be consistent with a sus- tained economic expansion, strong labor market condi- tions, and inflation near 2 percent over the medium term. This gradual approach would balance the risk of tightening monetary policy too quickly, which could lead to an abrupt slowing in the economy and inflation mov- ing below the Committee’s objective, against the risk of moving too slowly, which could engender inflation per- sistently above the objective and possibly contribute to a buildup of financial imbalances. Participants offered their views about how much addi- tional policy firming would likely be required for the Committee to sustainably achieve its objectives of max- imum employment and 2 percent inflation. A few par- ticipants expected that policy would need to become modestly restrictive for a time and a number judged that it would be necessary to temporarily raise the federal funds rate above their assessments of its longer-run level in order to reduce the risk of a sustained overshooting of the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective or the risk posed by significant financial imbalances. A couple of participants indicated that they would not favor adopting a restrictive policy stance in the absence of clear signs of an overheating economy and rising infla- tion. Participants reaffirmed that adjustments to the path for the policy rate would depend on their assessments of the evolution of the economic outlook and risks to the out- look relative to the Committee’s statutory objectives. Many of them noted that future adjustments to the tar- get range for the federal funds rate will depend on the evaluation of incoming information and its implications for the economic outlook. In this context, estimates of the level of the neutral federal funds rate would be only one among many factors that the Committee would con- sider in making its policy decisions. Building on comments expressed at previous meetings, a couple of participants indicated that it would be desir- able to assess the Committee’s strategic approach to the conduct of policy and to hold a periodic and systematic review of the strengths and weaknesses of the Commit- tee’s monetary policy framework. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the Committee met in August indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a strong rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the un- employment rate had stayed low. Household spending and business fixed investment had grown strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remained near 2 per- cent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed on balance. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Members viewed the recent data as consistent with an economy that was evolving about as they had expected. Consequently, members expected that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with sustained expansion of eco- nomic activity, strong labor market conditions, and in- flation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec- tive over the medium term. Members continued to judge that the risks to the economic outlook remained roughly balanced. After assessing current conditions and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- bers voted to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2 to 2¼ percent. Members agreed that the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate would depend on their assessment of realized and expected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum-employment objective and symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. They reiterated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and in- flation expectations, and readings on financial and inter- national developments. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed to remove the sentence indicating that “the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative.” Members made various points regarding the removal of the sentence from the statement. These points included that the characterization of the stance of policy as “ac- commodative” had provided useful forward guidance in the early stages of the policy normalization process, that this characterization was no longer providing meaning- ful information in light of uncertainty surrounding the level of the neutral policy rate, that it was appropriate to remove the characterization of the stance from the Committee’s statement before the target range for the federal funds rate moved closer to the range of estimates of the neutral policy rate, and that the Committee’s ear- lier communications had helped prepare the public for this change. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective September 27, 2018, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2 to 2¼ percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse re- purchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conven- tions) at an offering rate of 2.00 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such op- erations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during Septem- ber that exceeds $24 billion, and to continue re- investing in agency mortgage-backed securities the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during September that exceeds $16 billion. Ef- fective in October, the Committee directs the Desk to roll over at auction the amount of prin- cipal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing during each calendar month that exceeds $30 billion, and to reinvest in agency mortgage-backed securities the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during each calendar month that exceeds $20 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been strong, on av- erage, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has stayed low. Household spending and business fixed investment have grown strongly. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and Minutes of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ inflation for items other than food and energy remain near 2 percent. Indicators of longer- term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee expects that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective over the medium term. Risks to the eco- nomic outlook appear roughly balanced. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee de- cided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2 to 2¼ percent. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting against this action: None. Ms. George voted as alternate member at this meeting. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances to 2.20 percent, effective September 27, 2018. The Board of Governors also voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point in- crease in the primary credit rate (discount rate) to 2.75 percent, effective September 27, 2018.5 Following the vote, Chairman Powell noted that he had asked Governor Clarida to serve as chair of a subcom- mittee on communications issues. The other members of the subcommittee will include Governor Brainard, President Kaplan, and President Rosengren. The role of the subcommittee will be to help prioritize and frame communications issues for the Committee. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Wednesday–Thursday, Novem- ber 7–8, 2018. The meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m. on September 26, 2018. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on August 21, 2018, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 31–August 1, 2018. Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. _____________________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 5 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Rich- mond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. This vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 2.75 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of September 27, 2018, and the date such Reserve Banks informed the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Minneapolis were informed by the Secretary of the Board of the Board’s approval of their estab- lishment of a primary credit rate of 2.75 percent, effective Sep- tember 27, 2018.) The second vote of the Board also encom- passed approval of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- tee (FOMC) meeting held on September 25–26, 2018, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2018 to 2021 and over the longer run.1 Each participant’s projections were based on infor- mation available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy— including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer- run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projec- tions represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to con- verge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.2 “Ap- propriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to fos- ter outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. All participants who submitted longer-run projections expected that, in 2018, real GDP would expand at a pace exceeding their individual estimates of the longer-run growth rate of real GDP. All participants anticipated that real GDP growth would moderate in the coming years, and a majority of participants projected growth in 2021 to be below their estimates of the longer-run rate. All participants who submitted longer-run projections expected that the unemployment rate would run below their estimates of its longer-run level throughout the projection period. Participants generally projected that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percentage change in the price index for personal consumption ex- penditures (PCE), would be at or near the Committee’s 2 percent objective at the end of 2018 and would con- tinue at close to that rate through 2021. Compared with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from June, a solid majority of participants marked up their projections of real GDP growth and most increased their forecast of the unemployment rate in 2018, with participants indicating that these revisions mostly re- flected incoming data. Participants’ projections of infla- tion were largely unchanged from June. Table 1 and fig- ure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. As shown in figure 2, almost all participants continued to expect that the evolution of the economy, relative to their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, would likely warrant further gradual increases in the federal funds rate. The medians of participants’ projections of the federal funds rate through 2020 were unchanged relative to their June projections, and the me- dian of participants’ projections for 2021 was the same as that for 2020. The median projection for the longer- run federal funds rate rose slightly, with several partici- pants citing increases in model-based estimates of the longer-run real federal funds rate and strong economic data as reasons for the revision. A substantial majority of participants expected that the year-end 2020 and 2021 federal funds rate would be above their estimates of the longer-run rate. In general, participants continued to view the uncer- tainty around their economic projections as broadly sim- ilar to the average of the past 20 years. Risks to their outlooks were viewed as balanced, although a couple more participants than in June saw risks to their inflation projections as weighted to the upside. The Outlook for Economic Activity The medians of participants’ projections for the growth rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual assess- ments of appropriate monetary policy, were 3.1 percent for 2018, 2.5 percent for 2019, and 2.0 percent for 2020. For this SEP, participants also submitted projections for economic variables in 2021 for the first time. Partici- pants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2021 were al- most all below participants’ projections of growth in 2020 and, for a majority of participants, below their longer-run projections of real GDP growth. Some par- ticipants cited the waning of fiscal stimulus, less accom- modative monetary policy, or anticipated appreciation of the dollar as factors contributing to their forecasts for a moderation of real GDP growth over the course of the projection period. 1 Four members of the Board of Governors, one more than in June 2018, were in office at the time of the September 2018 meeting and submitted economic projections. The office of the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco was vacant at the time of this FOMC meeting; First Vice Pres- ident Mark A. Gould submitted economic projections. 2 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ , s t n e d i s e r p k n a B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F d n a s r e b m e m d r a o B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F f o s n o i t c e j o r p c i m o n o c E . 1 e l b a T 8 1 0 2 r e b m e t p e S , y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p f o s t n e m s s e s s a l a u d i v i d n i r i e h t r e d n u 3 e g n a R 2 y c n e d n e t l a r t n e C 1 n a i d e M t n e c r e P 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 r e g n o L n u r 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 r e g n o L 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 e l b a i r a V r e g n o L n u r 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 6 . 4 – 0 . 4 7 . 4 – 1 . 4 2 . 4 – 4 . 3 . a . n 0 . 4 – 3 . 3 0 . 4 – 3 . 3 8 . 3 – 4 . 3 8 . 3 – 3 . 3 8 . 3 – 7 . 3 8 . 3 – 5 . 3 6 . 4 – 3 . 4 6 . 4 – 3 . 4 0 . 4 – 5 . 3 . a . n 8 . 3 – 4 . 3 7 . 3 – 4 . 3 6 . 3 – 4 . 3 5 . 3 – 4 . 3 7 . 3 7 . 3 – 6 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 . a . n 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 9 . 1 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 . a . n 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 . a . n 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 9 . 1 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 . a . n 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 5 . 1 . a . n 4 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 5 . 1 8 . 2 – 1 . 2 7 . 2 – 1 . 2 2 . 3 – 9 . 2 0 . 3 – 5 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 6 . 1 . a . n 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 7 . 2 – 4 . 2 6 . 2 – 2 . 2 2 . 3 – 0 . 3 0 . 3 – 7 . 2 n u r 8 . 1 8 . 1 5 . 4 5 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 2 8 . 1 . a . n 7 . 3 . a . n 1 . 2 . a . n 1 . 2 . a . n 0 . 2 0 . 2 5 . 3 5 . 3 1 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 2 5 . 2 4 . 2 5 . 3 5 . 3 0 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 3 8 . 2 7 . 3 6 . 3 1 . 2 1 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 P D G l a e r n i e g n a h C n o i t c e j o r p e n u J e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n U n o i t c e j o r p e n u J 4 n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o C n o i t c e j o r p e n u J n o i t c e j o r p e n u J n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P h t a p y c i l o p e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r P : o m e M 5 . 3 – 5 . 2 5 . 3 – 3 . 2 1 . 4 – 1 . 2 . a . n 9 . 3 – 1 . 2 1 . 4 – 9 . 1 6 . 3 – 1 . 2 6 . 3 – 9 . 1 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 6 . 2 – 9 . 1 0 . 3 – 8 . 2 0 . 3 – 8 . 2 6 . 3 – 9 . 2 . a . n 6 . 3 – 1 . 3 6 . 3 – 1 . 3 4 . 3 – 9 . 2 4 . 3 – 9 . 2 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 0 . 3 9 . 2 4 . 3 . a . n 4 . 3 4 . 3 1 . 3 1 . 3 4 . 2 4 . 2 n o i t c e j o r p e n u J e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e F s u o i v e r p e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t m o r f s e g n a h c t n e c r e p e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i f o s e r u s a e m h t o b r o f s n o i t c e j o r p d n a ) P D G ( t c u d o r p c i t s e m o d s s o r g l a e r n i e g n a h c f o s n o i t c e j o r P : e t o N n o i t p m u s n o c l a n o s r e p r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t , y l e v i t c e p s e r h t r u o f e h t n i e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u n a i l i v i c e g a r e v a e h t , n i r o f e g n a h c f o s e t a r e g a t n e c r e p e h t e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c d n a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t o t r a e y e r a e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r P . y g r e n e d n a d o o f g n i d u l c x e E C P r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t d n a ) E C P ( s e r u t i d n e p x e s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a e t n e s e r p e r s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a f o t n e m s s e s s a r e h r o s i h n o d e s a b e r a s n o i t c e j o r p s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a E . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q s n o i t c e j o r p e h T . y m o n o c e e h t o t s k c o h s r e h t r u f f o e c n e s b a e h t n i d n a y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a r e d n u e g r e v n o c o t d e t c e p x e e b d l u o w e l b a i r a v h c a e h c i h w o t e t a r e h t f o t n e m s s e s s a l a r e d e f e h t r o f l e v e l t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t r o e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f e g n a r t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t f o t n i o p d i m e h t f o e u l a v e h t e r a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f n o e e t t i m m o C t e k r a M n e p O l a r e d e F e h t f o g n i t e e m e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e d a m e r e w s n o i t c e j o r p e n u J e h T . n u r r e g n o l e h t r e v o r o r a e y r a d n e l a c d e ﬁ i c e p s e h t f o d n e e h t t a e t a r s d n u f e n u J e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o , e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t , P D G l a e r n i e g n a h c e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o l t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n O . 8 1 0 2 , 3 1 – 2 1 e n u J . g n i t e e m , 8 1 0 2 , 6 2 – 5 2 r e b m e t p e S e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i s n o i t c e j o r p h c u s t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n o d n a , g n i t e e m , 8 1 0 2 , 3 1 – 2 1 e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , n e v e s i s n o i t c e j o r p f o r e b m u n e h t n e h W . t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f d e g n a r r a e r a s n o i t c e j o r p e h t n e h w n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , d o i r e p h c a e r o F . 1 . r a e y t a h t n i e l b a i r a v t a h t r o f , t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f , s n o i t c e j o r p ’ s t n a p i c i t r a p l l a s e d u l c n i r a e y n e v i g a n i e l b a i r a v a r o f e g n a r . r a e y h c a e n i e l b a i r a v h c a e r o f s n o i t c e j o r p t s e w o l e e r h t d n a t s e h g i h e e r h t e h t s e d u l c x e y c n e d n e t l a r t n e c e h T e h T . d e t c e l l o c t o n e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . 2 . 3 . 4 . s n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m o w t e h t f o e g a r e v a Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2018–21 and over the longer run Percent Change in real GDP Median of projections Central tendency of projections Range of projections Actual 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Percent Unemployment rate 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Percent PCE inflation 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Percent Core PCE inflation 3 2 1 7 6 5 4 3 3 2 1 3 2 1 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate Percent 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par- ticipant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ While most participants made slight upward revisions to their unemployment rate projections for this year, their projections in subsequent years and in the longer run were largely unchanged. A substantial majority of par- ticipants expected the unemployment rate to bottom out in 2019 or 2020 at levels below their estimates of the un- employment rate in the longer run, and then to rise a little in 2021. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- ployment rate from 2018 to 2021 and over the longer run. The distribution of individual projections for real GDP growth for this year shifted noticeably to the right relative to that in the June SEP; the distribution for pro- jected real GDP growth for 2019 also shifted to the right, albeit only a little. The distributions of individual projections for the unemployment rate in 2018 and 2019 shifted up a little relative to the distributions in June, while the distributions of the projections for the unem- ployment rate in the longer run were largely unchanged. The Outlook for Inflation The medians of projections for total PCE price inflation were 2.1 percent in 2018, 2.0 percent in 2019, and 2.1 percent in 2020 and 2021. The medians of projec- tions for core PCE price inflation were 2.0 percent in 2018 and 2.1 percent in 2019, 2020, and 2021. For the entire period between 2018 and 2020, these medians were very similar to the June SEP. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distributions of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation. Relative to the June SEP, a number of participants revised slightly down their projections for total PCE inflation this year and next. Most participants projected total PCE price infla- tion in the range of 1.9 to 2.0 percent for 2018 and 2019 and 2.1 to 2.2 percent in 2020 and 2021. Most partici- pants projected that core PCE inflation would run at 1.9 to 2.0 percent in 2018 and at 2.1 to 2.2 percent in 2019, 2020, and 2021. Relative to the June SEP, a larger number of participants projected that core PCE inflation in 2019 and 2020 would fall in the 2.1 to 2.2 percent range. Appropriate Monetary Policy Figure 3.E shows distributions of participants’ judg- ments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of the target range—for the federal funds rate for the end of each year from 2018 to 2021 and over the longer run. The distribution of projected policy rates for year-end 2018 was higher than in the June SEP, with projections clustered around 2.4 percent. The distributions of par- ticipants’ views of the appropriate federal funds rate at Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Variable 2018 2019 2020 2021 Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.2 ±1.8 ±1.9 ±2.0 Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.3 ±1.1 ±1.6 ±2.0 Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.1 Short-term interest rates3 . . . ±0.5 ±1.7 ±2.3 ±2.7 NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1998 through 2017 that were released in the fall by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump- tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Us- ing Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2017/files/2017020pap. pdf. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. the ends of 2019 and 2020 were relatively wide, as was the case in the June SEP. In discussing their projections, almost all participants continued to express the view that the appropriate tra- jectory of the federal funds rate would likely involve gradual increases. This view was predicated on several factors, including a judgment that a gradual path of pol- icy firming would appropriately balance the risk of a buildup of inflationary pressures or other imbalances as- sociated with high levels of resource utilization, against the risk that factors such as diminishing fiscal stimulus and adverse developments in foreign economies could become a significant drag on real GDP growth. As al- ways, the appropriate path of the federal funds rate would depend on incoming economic data and their im- plications for participants’ economic outlooks and as- sessments of risks. Uncertainty and Risks In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty, based on the forecast errors of var- ious private and government forecasts over the past Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2018–21 and over the longer run 2018 September projections June projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.4 2.3 2.5 Percent range 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Number of participants 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.4 2.3 2.5 Percent range 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.4 2.3 2.5 Percent range 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2019 2020 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.4 2.3 2.5 Percent range 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.4 2.3 2.5 Percent range 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2018–21 and over the longer run 2018 September projections June projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2019 2020 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2018–21 and over the longer run 2018 September projections June projections 2019 2020 2021 Longer run 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range 2.1 2.2 Percent range 2.1 2.2 Percent range 2.1 2.2 Percent range 2.1 2.2 Percent range 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂation, 2018–21 2018 September projections June projections 2019 2020 2021 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range 2.1 2.2 Percent range 2.1 2.2 Percent range 2.1 2.2 Percent range Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2018–21 and over the longer run 2018 September projections June projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2019 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 20 years, for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are rep- resented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts dis- play the median SEP projections for the three variables surrounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the de- gree of uncertainty attending these projections is similar to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 percent probability of being within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of uncer- tainty is substantial and generally increases as the fore- cast horizon lengthens. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- rounding their individual economic projections are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Nearly all participants viewed the degree of uncer- tainty attached to their economic projections for real GDP growth and inflation as broadly similar to the av- erage of the past 20 years.3 A couple more participants than in June viewed the uncertainty around the unem- ployment rate as higher than average. Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric around the median projections, they do not reflect any asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess- ments of the balance of risks to their economic projec- tions are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig- ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Most participants assessed the risks to their projections of real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly consistent with a symmetric fan chart. Those participants who did not judge the risks to their real GDP growth and unemployment rate projections as balanced were roughly evenly split between those who viewed the risks as being weighted to the upside and those who viewed the risks as being weighted to the downside. Risks around both total and core inflation projections were judged to be broadly balanced by a solid majority of participants; however, those partici- pants who saw the risks as uneven saw them as weighted to the upside. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, many participants pointed to up- side risks to real GDP growth from fiscal stimulus or stronger-than-expected effects of business optimism. Many participants also pointed to downside risks for the economy and inflation stemming from factors such as trade policy, stresses in emerging market economies, or stronger-than-anticipated appreciation of the dollar. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate were also subject to considera- ble uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the fed- eral funds rate in response to actual and prospective de- velopments over time in real GDP growth, the unem- ployment rate, and inflation, uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the federal funds rate importantly re- flects the uncertainties about the paths for those key eco- nomic variables along with other factors. Figure 5 pro- vides a graphical representation of this uncertainty, plot- ting the median SEP projection for the federal funds rate surrounded by confidence intervals derived from the re- sults presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the ap- propriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial and increases for longer horizons. 3 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici- pants’ projections. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.A. Uncertainty and risks in projections of GDP growth Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Change in real GDP Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 4 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about GDP growth September projections June projections Risks to GDP growth September projections June projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.B. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the unemployment rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Unemployment rate Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about the unemployment rate September projections June projections Risks to the unemployment rate September projections June projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.C. Uncertainty and risks in projections of PCE inﬂation Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors PCE inflation Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about PCE inflation September projections June projections Risks to PCE inflation September projections June projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about core PCE inflation September projections June projections Risks to core PCE inflation September projections June projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 5. Uncertainty in projections of the federal funds rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Federal funds rate Midpoint of target range Median of projections 70% confidence interval* Actual 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Percent 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com- mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The conﬁdence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to oﬀset the eﬀects of shocks to the economy. The conﬁdence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero—the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The conﬁdence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent conﬁdence interval if the conﬁdence interval has been truncated at zero. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 25–26, 2018Page 15_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- tial costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.8 to 4.2 percent in the current year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the second year, 1.1 to 4.9 percent in the third year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the fourth year. The corre- sponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall infla- tion would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third and fourth years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projec- tions for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion. However, in some instances, the risks around the pro- jections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemploy- ment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median pro- jection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig- ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par- ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summa- rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone- tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac- tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri- ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee November 7–8, 2018 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, Novem- ber 7, 2018, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Thursday, November 8, 2018, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman John C. Williams, Vice Chairman Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Mary C. Daly Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian M. Doyle, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Eric M. Engen, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; S. Wayne Passmore, _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Andre Anderson, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta William F. Bassett, Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Marnie Gillis DeBoer3 and David López-Salido, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Molly E. Mahar,3 Associate Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Stacey Tevlin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Min Wei, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Christopher J. Gust, Laura Lipscomb,3 and Zeynep Senyuz,3 Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Patrick E. McCabe, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Jeff Fuhrer, Sylvain Leduc, Kevin Stiroh,4 Daniel G. Sullivan, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, San Francisco, New York, Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively Paolo A. Pesenti, Paula Tkac,3 Luke Woodward, Mark L.J. Wright, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,3 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Atlanta, Kansas City, Minneapolis, and New York, respectively Roc Armenter,3 Satyajit Chatterjee, Deborah L. Leonard,3 Pia Orrenius, Matthew D. Raskin,3 and Patricia Zobel,3 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, New York, Dallas, New York, New York, respectively John P. McGowan,3 Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Penelope A. Beattie,4 Assistant to the Secretary, Office Bank of Richmond of the Secretary, Board of Governors Michiel De Pooter, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Economist and Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Gara Afonso,3 Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Alyssa G. Anderson3 and Kurt F. Lewis, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Joshua S. Louria,3 Lead Financial Institution and Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Sriya Anbil,3 Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Implementation Long-Run Monetary Policy Frameworks Committee participants resumed their discussion of po- tential long-run frameworks for monetary policy imple- mentation, a topic last discussed at the November 2016 FOMC meeting. The staff provided briefings that de- scribed changes in recent years in banks’ uses of re- serves, outlined tradeoffs associated with potential choices of operating regimes to implement monetary policy and control short-term interest rates, reviewed potential choices of the policy target rate, and summa- rized developments in the policy implementation frame- works of other central banks. 3 Attended through the discussion of the long-run monetary policy implementation frameworks. 4 Attended Wednesday session only. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The staff noted that banks’ liquidity management prac- tices had changed markedly since the financial crisis, with large banks now maintaining substantial buffers of reserves, among other high-quality liquid assets, to meet potential outflows and to comply with regulatory re- quirements. Information from bank contacts as well as a survey of banks indicated that, in an environment in which money market interest rates were very close to the interest rate paid on excess reserve balances, banks would likely be comfortable operating with much lower levels of reserve balances than at present but would wish to maintain substantially higher levels of balances than before the crisis. On average, survey responses sug- gested that banks might reduce their reserve holdings only modestly from those “lowest comfortable” levels if money market interest rates were somewhat above the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate. Across banks, however, individual survey responses on this issue varied substantially. The staff highlighted how changes in the determinants of reserve demand since the crisis could affect the tradeoffs between two types of operating regimes: (1) one in which aggregate excess reserves are suffi- ciently limited that money market interest rates are sen- sitive to small changes in the supply of reserves and (2) one in which aggregate excess reserves are suffi- ciently abundant that money market interest rates are not sensitive to small changes in reserve supply. In the for- mer type of regime, the Federal Reserve actively adjusts reserve supply in order to keep its policy rate close to target. This technique worked well before the financial crisis, when reserve demand was fairly stable in the ag- gregate and largely influenced by payment needs and re- serve requirements. However, with the increased use of reserves for precautionary liquidity purposes following the crisis, there was some uncertainty about whether banks’ demand for reserves would now be sufficiently predictable for the Federal Reserve to be able to pre- cisely target an interest rate in this way. In the latter type of regime, money market interest rates are not sensitive to small fluctuations in the demand for and supply of reserves, and the stance of monetary policy is instead transmitted from the Federal Reserve’s administered rates to market rates—an approach that has been effec- tive in controlling short-term interest rates in the United States since the financial crisis, as well as in other coun- tries where central banks have used this approach. The staff briefings also examined the tradeoffs between alternative policy rates that the Committee could choose in each of the regimes. In a regime of limited excess reserves, the Federal Reserve’s policy tools most directly affect overnight unsecured rates paid by banks, such as the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) and the over- night bank funding rate (OBFR). These rates could also be targeted with abundant excess reserves, as could in- terest rates on secured funding or a mixture of secured and unsecured rates. Participants commented on the advantages of a regime of policy implementation with abundant excess reserves. Based on experience over recent years, such a regime was seen as providing good control of short-term money market rates in a variety of market conditions and effec- tive transmission of those rates to broader financial con- ditions. Participants commented that, by contrast, inter- est rate control might be difficult to achieve in an oper- ating regime of limited excess reserves in view of the po- tentially greater unpredictability of reserve demand re- sulting from liquidity regulations or changes in risk ap- petite, or the increased variability of factors affecting re- serve supply. Participants also observed that regimes with abundant excess reserves could provide effective control of short-term rates even if large amounts of li- quidity needed to be added to address liquidity strains or if large-scale asset purchases needed to be undertaken to provide macroeconomic stimulus in situations where short-term rates are at their effective lower bound. Monetary policy operations in this regime would also not require active management of reserve supply. In addi- tion, the provision of sizable quantities of reserves could enhance financial stability and reduce operational risks in the payment system by maintaining a high level of li- quidity in the banking system. A number of participants commented that the attractive features of a regime of abundant excess reserves should be weighed against the potential drawbacks of such a re- gime as well as the potential benefits of returning to a regime similar to that employed before the financial cri- sis. Potential drawbacks of an abundant reserves regime included challenges in precisely determining the quantity of reserves necessary in such systems, the need to main- tain relatively sizable quantities of reserves and holdings of securities, and relatively large ongoing interest ex- penses associated with the remuneration of reserves. Some noted that returning to a regime of limited excess reserves could demonstrate the Federal Reserve’s ability to fully unwind the policies used to respond to the crisis and might thereby increase public acceptance or effec- tiveness of such policies in the future. Participants noted that the level of reserve balances required to remain in a regime where rate control does not entail active manage- ment of the supply of reserves was quite uncertain, but _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 7–8, 2018Page 3 they thought that reserve supply could be reduced sub- stantially below its current level while remaining in such a regime. They expected to learn more about the de- mand for reserves as the balance sheet continued to shrink in a gradual and predictable manner. They also observed that it might be possible to adopt strategies that provide incentives for banks to reduce their demand for reserves. Participants judged that if the level of re- serves needed for a regime with abundant excess re- serves turned out to be considerably higher than antici- pated, the possibility of returning to a regime in which excess reserves were limited and adjustments in reserve supply were used to influence money market rates would warrant further consideration. Participants noted that lending in the federal funds mar- ket was currently dominated by the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs). Participants cited several potential ben- efits of targeting the OBFR rather than the EFFR: The larger volume of transactions and greater variety of lend- ers underlying the OBFR could make that rate a broader and more robust indicator of banks’ overnight funding costs, the OBFR could become an even better indicator after the potential incorporation of data on onshore wholesale deposits, and the similarity of the OBFR and the EFFR suggested that transitioning to the OBFR would not require significant changes in the way the Committee conducted and communicated monetary policy. Some participants saw it as desirable to explore the possibility of targeting a secured interest rate. Some also expressed interest in studying, over the longer term, approaches in which the Committee would target a mix- ture of secured and unsecured rates. Participants expected to continue their discussion of long-run implementation frameworks and related issues at upcoming meetings. They emphasized that it would be important to communicate clearly the rationale for any choice of operating regime and target interest rate. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) reviewed recent developments in domestic and global financial markets. The equity market was quite volatile over the intermeeting period, with U.S. stock prices down as much as 10 percent at one point before recovering somewhat. Investors pointed to a number of uncertainties in the global outlook that may have con- tributed to the decline in stock prices, including ongoing trade tensions between the United States and China, growing concerns about the fiscal position of the Italian government and its broader implications for financial markets and institutions, and some worries about the outcome of the Brexit negotiations. Market contacts also noted some nervousness about corporate earnings growth and an increase in longer-term Treasury yields over recent weeks as factors contributing to downward pressure on equity prices. The volatility in equity mar- kets was accompanied by a rise in risk spreads on corpo- rate debt, although the widening in risk spreads was not as notable as in some past stock market downturns. On balance, the turbulence in equity markets did not leave much imprint on near-term U.S. monetary policy expectations. Respondents to the Open Market Desk’s recent Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants indicated that respondents placed high odds on a further quarter-point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate at the December FOMC meeting; that expectation also seemed to be embedded in federal funds futures quotes. Further out, the median of survey respondents’ modal expectations for the path of the fed- eral funds rate pointed to about three additional policy firmings next year while futures quotes appeared to be pricing in a somewhat flatter trajectory. The manager also reviewed recent developments in global markets. In China, investors were concerned about the apparent slowing of economic expansion and the implications of continued trade tensions with the United States. Chinese stock price indexes declined fur- ther over the intermeeting period and were off nearly 20 percent on the year to date. The renminbi continued to depreciate, moving closer to 7.0 renminbi per dol- lar—a level that some market participants viewed as a possible trigger for intensifying depreciation pressures. Anecdotal reports suggested that Chinese authorities had intervened to support the renminbi. The deputy manager followed with a discussion of re- cent developments in money markets and Desk opera- tions. The EFFR along with other overnight rates edged higher over the weeks following the increase in the target range at the previous meeting. Most recently, the EFFR had risen to the level of the IOER rate, placing it 5 basis points below the top of the target range. The upward pressure on the EFFR and other money market rates re- portedly stemmed partly from a sizable increase in Treasury bill supply and a corresponding increase in Treasury bill yields. In part reflecting that development, FHLBs shifted the composition of their liquidity portfo- lios away from overnight lending in the federal funds market in favor of the higher returns on overnight re- purchase agreements and on interest-bearing deposit ac- counts at banks; these reallocations in their liquidity Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ portfolios in turn contributed to upward pressure on the EFFR. At the same time, anecdotal reports suggested that some depositories were seeking to increase their borrowing in federal funds from FHLBs, partly because of the favorable treatment of such borrowing under li- quidity regulations. In addition, rates on term borrowing had moved higher over recent weeks, perhaps encourag- ing some depositories to bid up rates on overnight fed- eral funds loans. To date, there were no clear signs that the ongoing decline in reserve balances in the banking system associated with the gradual normalization of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet had contributed mean- ingfully to the upward pressure on money market rates. Indeed, banks reportedly were willing to reduce reserve holdings in order to lend in overnight repurchase agree- ment (repo) markets at rates just a few basis points above the IOER rate. However, respondents to the Desk’s recent Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants indi- cated that they anticipated the reduction in the supply of reserves in the banking system could become a very im- portant factor influencing the spread between the IOER rate and the EFFR over the last three quarters of next year. The deputy manager also provided an update on plans to incorporate additional data on overnight depos- its in the OBFR. Banks had begun reporting new data on onshore overnight deposits in October. In aggregate, the volumes reported in onshore overnight deposits were substantial and the rates reported for these instru- ments were very close to rates reported on overnight Eu- rodollar transactions. The new data were expected to be incorporated in the calculation of the OBFR later next year. Following the Desk briefings, the Chairman noted the upward trend in the EFFR relative to the IOER rate over the intermeeting period and suggested that it might be appropriate to implement another technical adjust- ment in the IOER rate relative to the top of the target range for the federal funds rate fairly soon. While the funds rate seemed to have stabilized recently, there re- mained some risk that it could continue to drift higher before the Committee’s next meeting. As a contingency plan, participants agreed that it would be appropriate for the Board to implement such a technical adjustment in the IOER rate before the December meeting if neces- sary to keep the federal funds rate well within the target range established by the FOMC. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the November 7–8 meet- ing indicated that labor market conditions continued to strengthen in recent months and that real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a strong rate in the third quarter, similar to its pace in the first half of the year. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption ex- penditures (PCE), was 2.0 percent in September. Sur- vey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. Total nonfarm payroll employment increased at a strong pace, on average, in September and October. The na- tional unemployment rate decreased to 3.7 percent in September and remained at that level in October, while the labor force participation rate and the employment- to-population ratio moved up somewhat over those two months. The unemployment rates for African Ameri- cans, Asians, and Hispanics in October were below their levels at the end of the previous expansion. The share of workers employed part time for economic reasons continued to be close to the lows reached in late 2007. The rates of private-sector job openings and quits both remained at high levels in September; initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits in late October were close to historically low levels. Total labor compensa- tion per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased 2.8 percent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter, the employment cost index for private workers increased 2.9 percent over the 12 months ending in Sep- tember, and average hourly earnings for all employees rose 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending in October. Industrial production expanded at a solid pace again in September, and indicators for output in the fourth quar- ter were generally positive. Production worker hours in the manufacturing sector increased in October, au- tomakers’ assembly schedules suggested that light motor vehicle production would rise in the fourth quarter, and new orders indexes from national and regional manufac- turing surveys pointed to solid gains in factory output in the near term. Real PCE continued to grow strongly in the third quar- ter. Overall consumer spending rose steadily in recent months, and light motor vehicle sales stepped up to a robust pace in September and edged higher in October. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 7–8, 2018Page 5 Key factors that influence consumer spending—includ- ing solid gains in real disposable personal income and the effects of earlier increases in equity prices and home values on households’ net worth—continued to be sup- portive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. Con- sumer sentiment, as measured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, remained upbeat in October. Real residential investment declined further in the third quarter, likely reflecting a range of factors including the continued effects of rising mortgage interest rates on the affordability of housing. Starts of both new single- family homes and multifamily units decreased last quar- ter, but building permit issuance for new single-family homes—which tends to be a good indicator of the un- derlying trend in construction of such homes—was little changed on net. Sales of both new and existing homes declined again in the third quarter, while pending home sales edged up in September. Growth in real private expenditures for business equip- ment and intellectual property moderated in the third quarter following strong gains in these expenditures in the first half of the year. Nominal orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft edged down over the two months ending in September after brisk increases in July, while readings on business senti- ment remained upbeat. Real business expenditures for nonresidential structures declined in the third quarter both for the drilling and mining sector and outside that sector. The number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for struc- tures in the drilling and mining sector—held about steady from late May through late October. Total real government purchases rose in the third quar- ter. Real federal purchases increased, mostly reflecting higher defense expenditures. Real purchases by state and local governments also increased, as real construc- tion spending by these governments rose and payrolls expanded. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in August and September. Exports decreased in August but more than recovered in September, reflecting the pattern of industrial supplies exports. Imports of con- sumer goods led imports higher in both months. The change in net exports was estimated to have been a siz- able drag on real GDP growth in the third quarter. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 2.0 percent over the 12 months ending in September. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, also was 2.0 percent over that same period. The con- sumer price index (CPI) rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in September, while core CPI infla- tion was 2.2 percent. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations—includ- ing those from the Michigan survey, the Blue Chip Eco- nomic Indicators, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on balance. Foreign economic growth appeared to pick up in the third quarter, as a strong rebound in economic activity in several emerging market economies (EMEs) more than offset a slowdown in China and most advanced for- eign economies (AFEs). Preliminary GDP data showed that Mexico’s economy grew briskly, reversing its sec- ond-quarter contraction, while indicators suggested that Brazil’s economy rebounded from a nationwide truck- ers’ strike. In contrast, GDP growth slowed in China and the euro area, and indicators pointed to a step-down in Japanese growth. Foreign inflation picked up in the third quarter, boosted by higher oil prices and, in China, by higher food prices. However, underlying inflation pressures remained muted, especially in some AFEs. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Concerns about ongoing international trade tensions, the global growth outlook, and rising interest rates weighed on global equity market sentiment over the in- termeeting period. Domestic stock prices declined con- siderably, on net, and equity market implied volatility rose. Nominal Treasury yields ended the period higher amid some moderate volatility, and the broad dollar in- dex moved up. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses and households remained supportive of eco- nomic activity on balance. During the intermeeting period, broad U.S. equity price indexes declined considerably, on net, amid somewhat elevated day-to-day volatility. Various factors appeared to weigh on investor sentiment including news related to ongoing international trade tensions and investors’ con- cerns about the sustainability of strong corporate earn- ings growth. Stock prices in the basic materials and in- dustrial sectors underperformed the broader market, re- portedly reflecting an increase in trade tensions with China. More broadly, investors seemed to reassess eq- uity valuations that appeared elevated. Investors also re- acted to some large firms raising concerns about the ef- fect of rising costs on their future profitability in their latest earnings reports. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index at the one-month horizon—the VIX— Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ increased, though it remained below the levels seen in early February. Despite the considerable declines in do- mestic stock prices, spreads of investment- and specula- tive-grade corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury yields widened only modestly. FOMC communications over the intermeeting period were viewed by market participants as consistent with a continued gradual removal of monetary policy accom- modation. Market-implied measures of monetary policy expectations were generally little changed. Investors continued to see virtually no odds of a further quarter- point firming in the target range for the federal funds rate at the November FOMC meeting and high odds of a further firming at the December FOMC meeting. The market-implied path for the federal funds rate beyond 2018 increased a bit. Medium- and longer-term nominal Treasury yields ended the period higher amid some moderate volatility over the intermeeting period. Meanwhile, measures of inflation compensation derived from Treasury Inflation- Protected Securities declined somewhat, with some of the decline occurring following the weaker-than-ex- pected September CPI release. Overnight interest rates in short-term funding markets rose in line with the increase in the target range for the federal funds rate announced at the September FOMC meeting. Over the intermeeting period, the spread be- tween the EFFR and the IOER rate narrowed from 2 basis points to 0 basis points. Take-up at the Federal Reserve’s overnight reverse repo facility remained low. Over the intermeeting period, global investors focused on changes in U.S. equity prices and interest rates, ongo- ing trade tensions between the United States and China, and uncertainty regarding budget negotiations between the Italian government and the European Union. For- eign equity prices posted notable net declines; option- implied measures of foreign equity volatility spiked in October but remained well below levels seen in February and subsequently retraced some of those increases. Ten- year Italian sovereign bond spreads over German equiv- alents widened significantly, and there were moderate spillovers to other euro-area peripheral spreads. Bond yields in Germany and the United Kingdom fell, partly reflecting weaker-than-expected inflation data and Eu- ropean political developments. In contrast, Canadian yields increased slightly, bolstered by the announcement of the U.S.-Mexico-Canada trade agreement and a policy rate hike by the Bank of Canada. The dollar appreciated against most advanced and emerging market currencies, and EME-dedicated funds experienced small outflows. Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms continued to be supportive of borrowing and spending over the in- termeeting period. Net debt financing of nonfinancial firms was robust in the third quarter, as weak specula- tive-grade bond issuance was largely offset by rapid lev- eraged loan issuance. The pace of equity issuance was solid in September but slowed somewhat in October. The outlook for corporate earnings remained favorable on balance. Respondents to the October Senior Loan Officer Opin- ion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) re- ported, on net, that their institutions had eased standards and terms for commercial and industrial loans to large and middle-market firms over the past three months. All respondents that had done so cited increased competi- tion from other lenders as an important reason. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained solid, though there were some signs of modest deterio- ration. Gross issuance of municipal bonds in September and October was strong, much of which raised new cap- ital. Financing conditions in the commercial real estate (CRE) sector remained accommodative. Banks in the October SLOOS reported, on a portfolio-weighted ba- sis, an easing of standards on CRE loans over the third quarter on net. Interest rate spreads on commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) remained near their post-crisis lows, while issuance of non-agency and agency CMBS was stable in recent months and similar to year-earlier levels. Most borrowers in the residential mortgage market con- tinued to experience accommodative financing condi- tions, although the increase in mortgage rates since 2016 appeared to have reduced housing demand, and financ- ing conditions remained somewhat tight for borrowers with low credit scores. Growth in home-purchase mort- gage originations slowed over the past year as mortgage rates stayed near their highest level since 2011, and refi- nancing activity continued to be very muted. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets, on balance, remained supportive of growth in household spending, although interest rates for consumer loans continued to rise. Credit card loan growth showed signs of moderating amid rising interest rates and reported tightening of lending standards at the largest credit card banks. Compared with the beginning of this year, re- spondents to the October 2018 SLOOS reported, on a _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 7–8, 2018Page 7 portfolio-weighted basis, a reduced willingness to issue credit card loans to borrowers across the credit spectrum and, in particular, to borrowers with lower credit scores; meanwhile, banks reported having eased standards on auto loans. The staff provided its latest report on potential risks to financial stability; the report again characterized the fi- nancial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as moderate on balance. This overall assessment incorpo- rated the staff’s judgment that vulnerabilities associated with asset valuation pressures continued to be elevated, that vulnerabilities from financial-sector leverage and maturity and liquidity transformation remained low, and that vulnerabilities from household leverage were still in the low-to-moderate range. Additionally, the staff judged vulnerabilities from leverage in the nonfinancial business sector as elevated and noted a pickup in the is- suance of risky debt and the continued deterioration in underwriting standards on leveraged loans. The staff also characterized overall vulnerabilities to foreign finan- cial stability as moderate while highlighting specific is- sues in some foreign economies, including—depending on the country—high private or sovereign debt burdens, external vulnerabilities, and political uncertainties. Staff Economic Outlook In the U.S. economic forecast prepared for the Novem- ber FOMC meeting, the staff continued to project that real GDP would increase a little less rapidly in the sec- ond half of the year than in the first half. Hurricanes Florence and Michael had devastating effects on many communities, but they appeared likely to leave essentially no imprint on the national economy in the second half of the year as a whole. Relative to the forecast prepared for the previous meeting, the projection for real GDP growth this year was little revised. Over the 2018–20 pe- riod, output was forecast to rise at a rate above or at the staff’s estimate of potential growth and then slow to a pace below it in 2021. The unemployment rate was pro- jected to decline further below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate but to bottom out in 2020 and begin to edge up in 2021. The medium-term projection for real GDP growth was only a bit weaker than in the previous forecast, primarily reflecting a lower projected path for equity prices, leaving the unemployment rate forecast little revised. With labor market conditions al- ready tight, the staff continued to assume that projected employment gains would manifest in smaller-than-usual downward pressure on the unemployment rate and in larger-than-usual upward pressure on the labor force participation rate. The staff expected both total and core PCE price infla- tion to remain close to 2 percent through the medium term. The staff’s forecasts for both total and core PCE price inflation were little revised on net. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff also saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the upside, household spending and business investment could expand faster than the staff projected, supported in part by the tax cuts enacted last year. On the down- side, trade policies and foreign economic developments could move in directions that have significant negative effects on U.S. economic growth. Risks to the inflation projection also were seen as balanced. The upside risk that inflation could increase more than expected in an economy that was projected to move further above its potential was counterbalanced by the downside risk that longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than was assumed in the staff forecast. Participants’ View on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of the economic situation and the outlook, meeting participants agreed that information received since the FOMC met in September indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a strong rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined. Household spending had continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment had moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and core inflation, which excludes changes in food and energy prices, had remained near 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expecta- tions were little changed on balance. Based on recent readings on spending, prices, and the labor market, participants generally indicated little change in their assessment of the economic outlook, with above-trend economic growth expected to con- tinue before slowing to a pace closer to trend over the medium term. Participants pointed to several factors supporting above-trend growth, including strong em- ployment gains, expansionary federal tax and spending policies, and continued high levels of consumer and business confidence. Several participants observed that the stimulative effects of fiscal policy would likely dimin- ish over time, while the lagged effects of reductions in monetary policy accommodation would show through Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ more fully, with both factors contributing to their expec- tation that economic growth would slow to a pace closer to trend. In their discussion of the household sector, participants generally continued to characterize consumption growth as strong. This view was supported by reports from Dis- trict contacts, which were mostly upbeat regarding con- sumer spending. Although household spending overall was seen as strong, most participants noted weakness in residential investment. This weakness was attributed to a variety of factors, including increased mortgage rates, building cost increases, and supply constraints. Participants observed that growth in business fixed in- vestment slowed in the third quarter following several quarters of rapid growth. Some participants pointed to anecdotal evidence regarding higher tariffs and uncer- tainty about trade policy, slowing global demand, rising input costs, or higher interest rates as possible factors contributing to the slowdown. A couple of others noted that business investment growth can be volatile on a quarterly basis and factors such as the recent cuts in cor- porate taxes and high levels of business sentiment were expected to support investment going forward. Reports from District contacts in the manufacturing, en- ergy, and service sectors were generally favorable, though growth in manufacturing activity was reportedly moderating in a couple of Districts. Business contacts generally remained optimistic about the outlook, but concerns about trade policy, slowing foreign demand, and labor shortages were reportedly weighing on busi- ness prospects. Contacts in the agricultural sector re- ported that conditions remain depressed, in part, due to the effects of trade policy actions on exports and farm incomes. Participants agreed that labor market conditions had strengthened further over the intermeeting period. Pay- rolls had increased strongly in October, and measures of labor market tightness such as rates of job openings and quits continued to be elevated. The unemployment rate remained at a historically low level in October, and the labor force participation rate moved up. A couple of participants saw scope for further increases in the labor force participation rate as the strong economy pulled more workers into the labor market, while a couple of other participants judged that there was little scope for significant further increases. Contacts in many Districts continued to report tight la- bor markets with difficulties finding qualified workers. In some cases, firms were responding to these difficul- ties by increasing training for less-qualified workers, out- sourcing work, or automating production, while in other cases, firms were responding by raising wages. Contacts in a couple of Districts indicated that labor shortages, particularly for skilled labor, might be constraining activ- ity in certain industries. Participants observed that, at the national level, measures of nominal wage growth ap- peared to be picking up. Many participants noted that the recent pace of aggregate wage gains was broadly con- sistent with trends in productivity growth and inflation. Participants observed that both overall and core PCE price inflation remained near 2 percent on a 12-month basis. In general, participants viewed recent price devel- opments as consistent with their expectation that infla- tion would remain near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective on a sustained basis. Reports from business contacts and surveys in a number of Districts were consistent with some firming in inflationary pres- sure. Contacts in many Districts indicated that input costs had risen and that increased tariffs were raising costs, especially for industries relying heavily on steel and aluminum. In a few Districts, transportation costs had reportedly increased. Some contacts indicated that while input costs were higher, it appeared that the pass- through of these higher costs to consumer prices was limited. Participants commented on a number of risks and un- certainties associated with their outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation over the medium term. A few participants indicated that uncertainty had increased recently, pointing to the high levels of uncer- tainty regarding the effects of fiscal and trade policies on economic activity and inflation. Some participants viewed economic and financial developments abroad, including the possibility of further appreciation of the U.S. dollar, as posing downside risks for domestic eco- nomic growth and inflation. A couple of participants expressed the concern that measures of inflation expec- tations would remain low, particularly if economic growth slowed more than expected. Several participants were concerned that the high level of debt in the nonfi- nancial business sector, and especially the high level of leveraged loans, made the economy more vulnerable to a sharp pullback in credit availability, which could exac- erbate the effects of a negative shock on economic ac- tivity. The potential for an escalation in tariffs or trade tensions was also cited as a factor that could slow eco- nomic growth more than expected. With regard to up- side risks, participants noted that greater-than-expected effects of fiscal stimulus and high consumer confidence _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 7–8, 2018Page 9 could lead to stronger-than-expected economic out- comes. Some participants raised the concern that tight- ening resource utilization in conjunction with an in- crease in the ability of firms to pass through increases in tariffs or in other input costs to consumer prices could generate undesirable upward pressure on inflation. In general, participants agreed that risks to the outlook ap- peared roughly balanced. In their discussion of financial developments, partici- pants observed that financial conditions tightened over the intermeeting period, as equity prices declined, longer-term yields and borrowing costs for most sectors increased, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar rose. Despite these developments, a number of partici- pants judged that financial conditions remained accom- modative relative to historical norms. Among those who commented on financial stability, a number cited possible risks related to elevated CRE prices, narrow corporate bond spreads, or strong issu- ance of leveraged loans. A few participants suggested that some of these financial vulnerabilities might not currently represent risks to financial stability so much as they represent downside risks to the economic outlook; a couple of participants suggested that financial stability risks and risks to the outlook are interconnected. A cou- ple of participants also commented on the upcoming re- lease of the Board’s first public Financial Stability Report and noted that the report would increase the transpar- ency of the Federal Reserve’s financial stability work as well as enhance communications on this topic. In their discussion of monetary policy, participants agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the cur- rent target range for the federal funds rate at this meet- ing. Participants generally judged that the economy had been evolving about as they had anticipated, with eco- nomic activity rising at a strong rate, labor market con- ditions continuing to strengthen, and inflation running at or near the Committee’s longer-run objective. Almost all participants reaffirmed the view that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would likely be consistent with sustaining the Commit- tee’s objectives of maximum employment and price sta- bility. Consistent with their judgment that a gradual approach to policy normalization remained appropriate, almost all participants expressed the view that another increase in the target range for the federal funds rate was likely to be warranted fairly soon if incoming information on the labor market and inflation was in line with or stronger than their current expectations. However, a few partici- pants, while viewing further gradual increases in the tar- get range of the federal funds rate as likely to be appro- priate, expressed uncertainty about the timing of such increases. A couple of participants noted that the federal funds rate might currently be near its neutral level and that further increases in the federal funds rate could un- duly slow the expansion of economic activity and put downward pressure on inflation and inflation expecta- tions. Participants emphasized that the Committee’s approach to setting the stance of policy should be importantly guided by incoming data and their implications for the economic outlook. They noted that their expectations for the path of the federal funds rate were based on their current assessment of the economic outlook. Monetary policy was not on a preset course; if incoming infor- mation prompted meaningful reassessments of the eco- nomic outlook and attendant risks, either to the upside or the downside, their policy outlook would change. Various factors such as the recent tightening in financial conditions, risks in the global outlook, and some signs of slowing in interest-sensitive sectors of the economy on the one hand, and further indicators of tightness in labor markets and possible inflationary pressures, on the other hand, were noted in this context. Participants also commented on how the Committee’s communications in its postmeeting statement might need to be revised at coming meetings, particularly the language referring to the Committee’s expectations for “further gradual in- creases” in the target range for the federal funds rate. Many participants indicated that it might be appropriate at some upcoming meetings to begin to transition to statement language that placed greater emphasis on the evaluation of incoming data in assessing the economic and policy outlook; such a change would help to convey the Committee’s flexible approach in responding to changing economic circumstances. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the Committee met in September indicated that the la- bor market had continued to strengthen and that eco- nomic activity had been rising at a strong rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined. Household spending had continued to grow strongly, while growth of busi- ness fixed investment had moderated recently from its rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remained near 2 percent. Indicators of long- Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ term inflation expectations were little changed on bal- ance. Members generally judged that the economy had been evolving about as they had anticipated at the previous meeting. Financial conditions, although somewhat tighter than at the time of the September FOMC meet- ing, had stayed accommodative overall, while the effects of expansionary fiscal policies enacted over the past year were expected to continue through the medium term. Consequently, members continued to expect that further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective over the medium term. Members continued to judge that the risks to the economic outlook were roughly balanced. After assessing current conditions and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- bers decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2 to 2¼ percent. Members agreed that the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate would depend on their assess- ment of realized and expected economic conditions rel- ative to the Committee’s maximum employment and symmetric 2 percent inflation objectives. They reiter- ated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and in- flation expectations, and readings on financial and inter- national developments. More generally, members noted that decisions regarding near-term adjustments of the stance of monetary policy would appropriately remain dependent on the evolution of the outlook as informed by incoming data. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective November 9, 2018, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2 to 2¼ percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate or similar holiday, trading weekend, conventions) at an offering rate of 2.00 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each calendar month that exceeds $30 billion, and to in agency mortgage- continue reinvesting backed securities the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during each calendar month that exceeds $20 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined. Household spending has continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment has moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remain near 2 percent. Indicators of longer- term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. seeks and price that Consistent with its statutory mandate, the foster maximum Committee to stability. employment The Committee expects further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 7–8, 2018Page 11 inflation near the market conditions, and Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective over the medium term. Risks to the economic outlook appear roughly balanced. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and the Committee inflation, decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2 to 2¼ percent. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un- changed at 2.20 percent and voted unanimously to ap- prove establishment of the primary credit rate at the ex- isting level of 2.75 percent, effective November 9, 2018. Update from Subcommittee on Communications Governor Clarida presented a proposal from the sub- committee on communications to conduct a review dur- ing 2019 of the Federal Reserve’s strategic framework for monetary policy. This assessment would consider the strategy, tools, and communications that would best enable the Federal Reserve to meet its statutory objec- tives of maximum employment and price stability. With labor market conditions close to maximum employment and inflation near the Committee’s 2 percent objective, it was an opportune time for the Federal Reserve to un- dertake this review and assess the robustness of its stra- tegic framework. During the review, the Federal Reserve would engage with a broad range of interested stakeholders across the country and host a research conference in June 2019. FOMC participants would discuss the strategic frame- work at subsequent FOMC meetings, drawing on the lessons from the outreach efforts and on staff analysis. The goal of these discussions would be to identify pos- sible ways to improve the Committee’s current strategic policy framework in order to ensure that the Federal Re- serve is best positioned going forward to achieve its stat- utory mandate. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on October 16, 2018, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 25–26, 2018. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee December 18–19, 2018 Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian M. Doyle, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed and Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Eric M. Engen, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach,3 Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 18, 2018, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, Decem- ber 19, 2018, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman John C. Williams, Vice Chairman Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Mary C. Daly Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist David W. Wilcox, Economist David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Marnie Gillis DeBoer,3 David López-Salido, and Min Wei, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; John J. Stevens, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Steven A. Sharpe, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Andrew Figura and John Sabelhaus, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust,4 Laura Lipscomb,3 and Zeynep Senyuz,3 Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Don Kim, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,5 Assistant to the Secretary, Office Michael Dotsey, Sylvain Leduc, Daniel G. Sullivan, Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, San Francisco, Chicago, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively Todd E. Clark, Evan F. Koenig, Antoine Martin, and Julie Ann Remache,3 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Dallas, New York, and New York, respectively Roc Armenter,3 Kathryn B. Chen,3 Jonathan L. Willis, and Patricia Zobel,3 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, Kansas City, and New York, respectively Gara Afonso3 and William E. Riordan,3 Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Suraj Prasanna3 and Lisa Stowe,3 Markets Officers, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl,2 Senior Economist and Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago of the Secretary, Board of Governors Fabrizio Perri, Monetary Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Michele Cavallo,5 Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mark A. Carlson,2 Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Andrea Ajello and Alyssa G. Anderson,3 Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Arsenios Skaperdas,3 Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Donielle A. Winford, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Implementation Long-Run Monetary Policy Frameworks Committee participants resumed their discussion from the November 2018 FOMC meeting of potential long- run frameworks for monetary policy implementation. At the December meeting, the staff provided a set of briefings that considered various issues related to the transition to a long-run operating regime with lower lev- els of excess reserves than at present and to a long-run composition of the balance sheet. The staff noted that during the transition to a long-run operating regime with excess reserves below current lev- els, the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) could begin to rise a little above the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate as reserves in the banking system declined gradually to a level that the Committee judges to be most appropriate for efficient and effective implementation of policy. This upward movement in the federal funds rate 3 Attended through the discussion of the long-run monetary policy implementation frameworks. 4 Attended the discussion of financial developments and open market operations through the close of the meeting. 5 Attended Tuesday session only. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ could be gradual. However, the staff noted that the fed- eral funds rate and other money market rates could pos- sibly become somewhat volatile at times as banks and financial markets adjusted to lower levels of reserve bal- ances. Were upward pressures on the federal funds rate to emerge, it could be challenging to distinguish between pressures that were transitory and likely to abate as fi- nancial institutions adjust and those that were more per- sistent and associated with aggregate reserve scarcity. The staff reported on the monitoring of conditions in money markets as well as various survey and market out- reach activities that could assist in detecting reserve scar- city. The staff reviewed a number of steps that the Fed- eral Reserve could take to ensure effective monetary pol- icy implementation were upward pressures on the fed- eral funds rate and other money market rates to emerge. These steps included lowering the IOER rate further within the target range, using the discount window to support the efficient distribution of reserves, and slow- ing or smoothing the pace of reserve decline through open market operations or through slowing portfolio re- demptions. The staff also discussed new ceiling tools that could help keep the EFFR within the Committee’s target range, including options that would add new counterparties for the Open Market Desk’s operations. The staff also provided a review of the liabilities on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet; the review described the factors that influence the size of reserve and nonreserve liabilities and discussed the increase in the size of these liabilities since the financial crisis. Additionally, the staff outlined various issues related to the long-run composi- tion of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) port- folio, including the maturity composition of the portfo- lio’s Treasury securities and the management of residual holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) after the Committee has normalized the size of the bal- ance sheet. In discussing the transition to a long-run operating re- gime, participants commented on the advantages and disadvantages of allowing reserves to decline to a level that could put noticeable upward pressure on the federal funds rate, at least for a time. Reducing reserves close to the lowest level that still corresponded to the flat por- tion of the reserve demand curve would be one ap- proach consistent with the Committee’s previously stated intention, in the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans that it issued in 2014, to “hold no more secu- rities than necessary to implement monetary policy effi- ciently and effectively.” However, reducing reserves to a point very close to the level at which the reserve de- mand curve begins to slope upward could lead to a sig- nificant increase in the volatility in short-term interest rates and require frequent sizable open market opera- tions or new ceiling facilities to maintain effective inter- est rate control. These considerations suggested that it might be appropriate to instead provide a buffer of re- serves sufficient to ensure that the Federal Reserve op- erates consistently on the flat portion of the reserve de- mand curve so as to promote the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy. Participants discussed options for maintaining control of interest rates should upward pressures on money market rates emerge during the transition to a regime with lower excess reserves. Several participants commented on op- tions that rely on existing or currently used tools, such as further technical adjustments to the IOER rate to keep the federal funds rate within the target range or us- ing the discount window, although such options were recognized to have limitations in some situations. Some participants commented on the possibility of slowing the pace of the decline in reserves in approaching the longer- run level of reserves. Standard temporary open market operations could be used for this purpose. In addition, participants discussed options such as ending portfolio redemptions with a relatively high level of reserves still in the system and then either maintaining that level of reserves or allowing growth in nonreserve liabilities to very gradually reduce reserves further. These ap- proaches could allow markets and banks more time to adjust to lower reserve levels while maintaining effective control of interest rates. Several participants, however, expressed concern that a slowing of redemptions could be misinterpreted as a signal about the stance of mone- tary policy. Some participants expressed an interest in learning more about possible options for new ceiling tools to provide firmer control of the policy rate. Participants commented on the role that the Federal Re- serve’s nonreserve liabilities have played in the expan- sion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet since the fi- nancial crisis. Many participants noted that the magni- tudes of these nonreserve liabilities—most significantly currency but also liabilities to the Treasury through the Treasury General Account and liabilities to foreign offi- cial institutions through their accounts at the Federal Re- serve—are not closely related to Federal Reserve mone- tary policy decisions. They also remarked that the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet was expected to increase over time as the growth of these liabilities roughly tracks the growth of nominal gross domestic product (GDP). Additionally, participants cited the so- cial benefits provided by these liabilities to the economy. Minutes of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Participants considered it important to present infor- mation on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to the public in ways that communicated these facts. In dis- cussing the long-run level of reserve liabilities, partici- pants noted that it might be useful to explore ways to encourage banks to reduce their demand for reserves and to provide information to banks and the public about the likely long-run level of reserves. Participants commented on a number of issues related to the long-run composition of the SOMA portfolio. With regard to the portfolio of Treasury securities, par- ticipants discussed the advantages of different portfolio maturity compositions. Several participants noted that a portfolio of holdings weighted toward shorter maturities would provide greater flexibility to lengthen maturity if warranted by an economic downturn, while a couple of others noted that a portfolio with maturities that matched the outstanding Treasury market would have a more neutral effect on the market. With regard to the MBS portfolio, participants noted that the passive run- off of MBS holdings through principal paydowns would continue for many years after the size of the balance sheet had been normalized. Several participants com- mented on the possibility of reducing agency MBS hold- ings somewhat more quickly than the passive approach by implementing a program of very gradual MBS sales sometime after the size of the balance sheet had been normalized. Participants expected to continue their discussion of long-run implementation frameworks and related issues at upcoming meetings. They reiterated the importance of communicating clearly on the rationale for any deci- sion made on the implementation framework. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The SOMA manager reviewed developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. Asset prices were volatile in recent weeks, reportedly reflecting a pullback from risk-taking by investors. In part, the deterioration in risk sentiment appeared to stem importantly from un- certainty about the state of trade negotiations between China and the United States. In addition, investors pointed to concerns about the global growth outlook, the unsettled state of Brexit negotiations, and uncertain- ties about the political situation in Europe. Against this backdrop, U.S. stock prices were down nearly 8 percent on the period. Risk spreads on corpo- rate bonds widened appreciably, with market partici- pants reportedly focusing on the potential implications of downside risks to the U.S. economic outlook for the financial condition of companies, particularly for com- panies at the lower end of the investment-grade spec- trum. Treasury yields declined significantly, especially at longer maturities, contributing to some flattening of the Treasury yield curve. Based on readings from Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), the decline in nominal Treasury yields was associated with a notable drop in inflation compensation. A sizable decline in oil prices was cited as an important factor contributing to the drop in measures of inflation compensation. The deterioration in market sentiment was accompanied by a significant downward revision in the expected path of the federal funds rate based on federal funds futures quotes. In addition, futures-based measures of policy expectations moved lower in response to speeches by Federal Reserve officials. The revision in the expected policy path was less noticeable in the Desk’s survey- based measures of the expected path of the federal funds rate. Desk surveys indicated that respondents placed high odds on a further quarter-point firming in the stance of monetary policy at the December meeting, but lower than the near certainty of a rate increase reported just before previous policy firmings in 2018; survey re- sponses anticipated that the median projected path of the federal funds rate in the Summary of Economic Pro- jections (SEP) would show only two additional quarter- point policy firmings next year—down from the three policy firmings in the median path in the September SEP results. The deputy manager followed with a discussion of money market developments and open market opera- tions. After a fast narrowing of the spread between the IOER rate and the EFFR before the November meet- ing, the EFFR had remained stable at, or just 1 basis point below the level of the IOER rate since then. Some upward pressures on overnight rates were evident in the repurchase agreement (repo) market, apparently from higher issuance of Treasury bills and an associated ex- pansion of primary dealer inventories over the inter- meeting period. Banks expanded their lending in repo markets in light of higher repo rates relative to the IOER rate; the willingness of banks to lend in repo markets suggested that the reserve supply was still ample. The deputy manager noted the results of the recent Desk sur- veys of primary dealers and market participants indicat- ing an increase in the median respondent’s estimate of the long-run level of reserve balances to a level closer to that implied by banks’ responses in the Senior Financial Officer Survey conducted in advance of the November FOMC meeting. The deputy manager also reported on paydowns on the SOMA securities holdings. Under the Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ baseline outlook, prepayments of principal on agency MBS would remain below the $20 billion redemption cap for the foreseeable future. However, if longer-term interest rates moved substantively lower than assumed in the baseline, some modest reinvestments in MBS could occur for a few months next year concurrent with the pickup in seasonal turnover. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information reviewed for the December 18–19 meeting indicated that labor market conditions contin- ued to strengthen in recent months and that real GDP growth was strong. Consumer price inflation, as meas- ured by the 12-month percentage change in the price in- dex for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), was 2 percent in October. Survey-based measures of longer- run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded further in November, and job gains were strong, on average, over recent months. The national unemployment rate re- mained at a very low level of 3.7 percent, and both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to- population ratio also stayed flat in November. The un- employment rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics in November were below their levels at the end of the previous economic expansion. The share of workers employed part time for economic reasons was still close to the lows reached in late 2007. The rates of private-sector job openings and quits were both still at high levels in October; initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits in early December were still close to historically low levels. Total labor compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector—a volatile measure even on a four-quarter change basis—increased 2.2 per- cent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 3.1 per- cent over the 12 months ending in November. Industrial production expanded, on net, over October and November. Output increased in the mining and util- ities sectors, while manufacturing production edged down on balance. Automakers’ assembly schedules sug- gested that production of light motor vehicles would rise in December, and new orders indexes from national and regional manufacturing surveys pointed to moderate gains in total factory output in the coming months. Household spending continued to increase at a strong pace in recent months. Real PCE growth was brisk in October, and the components of the nominal retail sales used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its estimate of PCE rose considerably in November. The pace of light motor vehicle sales edged down in No- vember but stayed near its recent elevated level. Key factors that influence consumer spending—including ongoing gains in real disposable personal income and the effects of earlier increases in equity prices and home val- ues on households’ net worth—continued to be sup- portive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. Con- sumer sentiment, as measured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, remained relatively up- beat through early December. Real residential investment appeared to be declining fur- ther in the fourth quarter, likely reflecting in part the ef- fects of the rise in mortgage interest rates over the past year on the affordability of housing. Starts of new sin- gle-family homes decreased in October and November, although starts of multifamily units rose sharply in No- vember. Building permit issuance for new single-family homes, which tends to be a good indicator of the under- lying trend in construction of such homes, moved down modestly over recent months. Sales of new homes de- clined markedly in October, although existing home sales increased modestly. Growth in real private expenditures for business equip- ment and intellectual property looked to be picking up solidly in the fourth quarter after moderating in the pre- vious quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital in October. goods excluding aircraft moved up Forward-looking indicators of business equipment spending—such as a rising backlog of unfilled orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft and upbeat readings on business sentiment—pointed to further spending gains in the near term. Nominal business ex- penditures for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector declined modestly in October, while the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in op- eration—an indicator of business spending for struc- tures in the drilling and mining sector—held about steady in November through early December. Total real government purchases appeared to be rising moderately in the fourth quarter. Nominal defense spending in October and November pointed to solid growth in real federal purchases. Real purchases by state and local governments looked to be only edging up, as nominal construction spending by these governments Minutes of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ rose solidly in October but their payrolls declined a little in October and November. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened slightly in October. Exports declined a little, with de- creases in exports of agricultural products and capital goods, although exports of industrial supplies increased. Imports rose a bit, with increases in imports of con- sumer goods and automotive products, but imports of capital goods declined sharply from September’s ele- vated level. Available trade data suggested that the con- tribution of the change in net exports to the rate of real GDP growth in the fourth quarter would be much less negative than the drag of nearly 2 percentage points in the third quarter. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 2 percent over the 12 months end- ing in October. Core PCE price inflation, which ex- cludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.8 percent over that same period. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2.2 percent over the 12 months ending in November, and core CPI inflation was also 2.2 per- cent. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations—including those from the Michigan survey, the Survey of Professional Fore- casters, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on balance. Foreign economic growth continued at a moderate pace in the third quarter, as a pickup in emerging market economies (EMEs) roughly offset slowing growth in ad- vanced foreign economies (AFEs). Among EMEs, growth in Mexico and Brazil bounced back from transi- tory second-quarter weakness, more than offsetting a slowdown in China and India. The softness in AFE growth partly reflected temporary factors, including dis- ruptions from natural disasters in Japan and the adop- tion of new car emissions testing in Germany. Indica- tors for economic activity in the fourth quarter were consistent with continued moderate foreign economic growth. Foreign inflation fell in recent months, largely reflecting a significant drag from lower oil prices. Un- derlying inflation pressures, especially in some AFEs, re- mained muted. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investors’ perceptions of downside risks to the domestic and global outlook appeared to increase over the inter- meeting period, reportedly driven in part by signs of slowing in foreign economies and growing concerns over escalating trade frictions. Both nominal U.S. Treas- ury yields and U.S. equity prices declined notably over the period. Financing conditions for businesses and households tightened a bit but generally remained sup- portive of economic growth. Remarks by Federal Reserve officials over the intermeet- ing period were interpreted by market participants as sig- naling a shift in the stance of policy toward a more grad- ual path of federal funds rate increases. The market- implied path for the federal funds rate for 2019 and 2020 shifted down markedly, while the market-implied prob- ability for a rate hike at the December FOMC meeting declined slightly though remained high. Nominal Treasury yields fell considerably over the pe- riod, with the declines most pronounced in longer-dated maturities and contributing to a flattening of the yield curve. The spread between 10- and 2-year nominal Treasury yields narrowed to near the 20th percentile of its distribution since 1971. Investor perceptions of in- creased downside risks to the outlooks for domestic and foreign economic growth, including growing concerns over trade frictions between the United States and China, reportedly weighed on yields. Measures of infla- tion compensation derived from TIPS also decreased notably over the period along with the declines in oil prices. Concerns over escalating trade tensions, global growth prospects, and the sustainability of corporate earnings growth were among the factors that appeared to contrib- ute to a significant drop in U.S. equity prices. The de- clines were largest in the technology and retail sectors. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 in- dex—the VIX—increased over the period and corpo- rate credit spreads widened, consistent with the selloff in equities. Over the intermeeting period, foreign financial markets were affected by perceived increases in downside risks to the global growth outlook and ongoing uncertainty about trade relations between the United States and China. Investors also focused on the state of negotia- tions over Brexit and the Italian government budget def- icit. Equity markets in AFEs posted notable declines, and Europe-dedicated bond and equity funds reported strong outflows. Equity declines in EMEs were more modest, and emerging market funds received modest in- flows on net. AFE sovereign yields declined significantly, reflecting decreases in U.S. bond yields and weaker-than-expected euro-area and U.K. economic data. Measures of infla- tion compensation generally fell, partly reflecting sharp decreases in oil prices. Spreads of Italian sovereign Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ yields over German counterparts narrowed amid pro- gress on budget negotiations between the Italian govern- ment and the European Commission. The U.S. dollar appreciated modestly; although declines in U.S. yields weighed on the dollar, deteriorating global risk senti- ment provided support. Ongoing uncertainty about the passage of a Brexit withdrawal agreement put downward pressure on the exchange value of the British pound. Short-term funding markets functioned smoothly over the intermeeting period. Elevated levels of Treasury bills outstanding have continued to put upward pressure on money market rates. The EFFR held steady at or very close to the level of the IOER rate, while take-up in the overnight reverse repo facility remained near historically low levels. In offshore funding markets, the one-month foreign exchange swap basis for most major currencies increased, consistent with typical year-end pressures. Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms remained accommodative, on net, though funding conditions for capital markets tightened somewhat as spreads on non- financial corporate bonds widened to near the middle of their historical distribution. Gross issuance of corporate bonds also moderated in November, driven by a signifi- cant step-down in speculative-grade bond issuance, while institutional leveraged loan issuance also slowed in November. Small business credit market conditions were little changed, and credit conditions in municipal bond markets stayed accommodative on net. Private-sector analysts revised down their projections for year-ahead corporate earnings a bit. In many cases, nonfinancial firms’ earnings reports suggested that tar- iffs were a salient concern in the changed outlook for corporate earnings. The pace of gross equity issuance through both seasoned and initial offerings moderated, consistent with the weakness and volatility in the stock market. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions remained accommodative. Commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) spreads widened slightly over the intermeeting period but remained near post-crisis lows. Issuance of non-agency CMBS was sta- ble while CRE loan growth remained strong at banks. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market also remained accommodative for most borrowers, but the demand for mortgage credit softened. Purchase mortgage origination activity declined modestly, while refinance activity remained muted. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets also re- mained accommodative. Broad consumer credit grew at a solid pace through September, though October and November saw credit card growth at banks edge a bit lower on average. Conditions in the consumer asset- backed securities market remained stable over the inter- meeting period with slightly higher spreads and robust issuance. Staff Economic Outlook With some stronger-than-expected incoming data on economic activity and the recent tightening in financial conditions, particularly the decline in equity prices, the U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for the De- cember FOMC meeting was little revised on balance. The staff continued to expect that real GDP growth would be strong in the fourth quarter of 2018, although somewhat slower than the rapid pace of growth in the previous two quarters. Over the 2018–20 period, real GDP was forecast to rise at a rate above the staff’s esti- mate of potential output growth and then slow to a pace below it in 2021. The unemployment rate was projected to decline further below the staff’s estimate of its longer- run natural rate but to bottom out by 2020 and begin to edge up in 2021. With labor market conditions already tight, the staff continued to assume that projected em- ployment gains would manifest in smaller-than-usual downward pressure on the unemployment rate and in larger-than-usual upward pressure on the labor force participation rate. The staff expected both total and core PCE price infla- tion to be just a touch below 2 percent in 2018, with total inflation revised down a bit because of recent declines in consumer energy prices. Core PCE price inflation was forecast to move up to 2 percent in 2019 and remain at that level through the medium term; total inflation was forecast to be a little below core inflation in 2019, re- flecting projected declines in energy prices, and then to run at the same level as core inflation over the following two years. The staff’s medium-term projections for both total and core PCE price inflation were little revised on net. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff also saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the upside, household spending and business investment could expand faster than the staff projected, supported in part by the tax cuts enacted last year. On the down- side, trade policies and foreign economic developments could move in directions that have significant negative effects on U.S. economic growth. Risks to the inflation Minutes of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ projection also were seen as balanced. The upside risk that inflation could increase more than expected in an economy that was projected to move further above its potential was counterbalanced by the downside risk that longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than was assumed in the staff forecast. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2018 through 2021 and over the longer run, based on their individual assess- ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each partici- pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- priate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. These projections and policy assessments are described in the SEP, which is an ad- dendum to these minutes. In their discussion of the economic situation and the outlook, meeting participants agreed that information received since the FOMC met in November indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a strong rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. House- hold spending had continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment had moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remained near 2 percent. Indica- tors of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed on balance. In assessing the economic outlook, participants noted the contrast between the strength of incoming data on economic activity and the concerns about downside risks evident in financial markets and in reports from business contacts. Recent readings on household and business spending, inflation, and labor market condi- tions were largely in line with participants’ expectations and indicated continued strength of the economy. By contrast, financial markets were volatile and conditions had tightened over the intermeeting period, with sizable declines in equity prices and notably wider corporate credit spreads coinciding with a continued flattening of the Treasury yield curve; in part, these changes in finan- cial conditions appeared to reflect greater concerns about the global economic outlook. Participants also re- ported hearing more frequent concerns about the global economic outlook from business contacts. After taking into account incoming economic data, in- formation from business contacts, and the tightening of financial conditions, participants generally revised down their individual assessments of the appropriate path for monetary policy and indicated either no material change or only a modest downward revision in their assessment of the economic outlook. Economic growth was ex- pected to remain above trend in 2019 and then slow to a pace closer to trend over the medium term. Partici- pants who downgraded their assessment of the eco- nomic outlook pointed to a variety of factors underlying their assessment, including recent financial market de- velopments, some softening in the foreign economic growth outlook, or a more pessimistic outlook for housing-sector activity. In their discussion of the household sector, participants generally characterized real PCE growth as remaining strong. Participants pointed to a number of factors that were supporting consumer spending, including further gains in wages and household income reflecting a strong labor market, expansionary federal tax policies, still- upbeat readings on consumer sentiment, recent declines in oil prices, and household balance sheets that generally remained healthy despite tighter financial conditions. Although household spending overall was seen as strong, several participants noted continued weakness in residential investment. This weakness was attributed to a variety of factors, including increased mortgage rates and rising home prices. Reports from District contacts in the auto sector were mixed. Several participants noted that business fixed investment remained solid despite a slowdown in the third quarter, as more recent data pointed to a rebound in investment spending. Business contacts in several Districts reported robust activity through the end of 2018 and planned to follow through or expand on their current capital ex- penditure projects. However, contacts in a number of Districts appeared less upbeat than at the time of the November meeting, as concerns about a variety of fac- tors—including trade policy, waning fiscal stimulus, slowing global economic growth, or financial market volatility—were reportedly beginning to weigh on busi- ness sentiment. A couple of participants commented that the recent decline in oil prices could be a sign of a weakening in global demand that could weigh on capital spending by oil production companies and affect com- panies providing services to the oil industry. However, Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ a couple of participants noted that the recent oil price decline could also be associated with increasing oil sup- ply rather than softening global demand. Contacts in the agricultural sector reported that condi- tions remained depressed, in part because of the effects of trade policy actions on exports and farm incomes, un- certainty about future trade agreements, and continued low commodity prices. Banks continued to report a gradual increase in agricultural loan delinquencies in re- cent months. Nonetheless, participants cited a few re- cent favorable developments, including new trade miti- gation payments as well as legislative action to maintain crop insurance that was seen as reducing uncertainty. Participants agreed that labor market conditions had re- mained strong. Payrolls continued to grow at an above- trend rate in November, and measures of labor market tightness such as rates of job openings and quits contin- ued to be elevated. The unemployment rate remained at a historically low level in November, and the labor force participation rate stayed steady, which represented an improvement relative to its gradual downward-sloping underlying trend. Several participants observed that la- bor force participation had been improving for low- skilled workers and for prime-age workers. A couple of participants saw scope for further improvements in the labor force participation rate relative to its historical downward trend, while a couple of others judged that there was little scope for significant further improve- ments. Contacts in many Districts continued to report tight la- bor markets with difficulties finding qualified workers. In some cases, firms were responding to these difficul- ties by using various types of nonwage incentives to at- tract and retain workers, while in other cases, firms were responding by raising wages. Many participants ob- served that, at the national level, most measures of nom- inal wage growth had risen and were currently at levels that were broadly in line with trends in productivity growth and inflation. Participants observed that both overall and core PCE price inflation remained near 2 percent on a 12-month basis, but that core inflation had edged lower in recent months. A few participants noted that the recent de- clines in energy prices would likely only temporarily weigh on headline inflation. Several participants re- marked that longer-term TIPS-based inflation compen- sation had declined notably since November, concurrent with both falling oil prices and a deterioration in investor risk sentiment. A few participants pointed to the decline in longer-term inflation compensation as an indication that longer-run inflation expectations may have edged lower, while several others cited survey-based measures as suggesting that longer-run expectations likely re- mained anchored. Participants generally continued to view recent price developments as consistent with their expectation that inflation would remain near the Com- mittee’s symmetric 2 percent objective on a sustained basis. Although a few participants pointed to anecdotal and survey evidence indicating rising input costs and pass-through of these higher costs to consumer prices, reports from business contacts and surveys in some other Districts suggested some moderation in inflation- ary pressure. In their discussion of financial developments, partici- pants agreed that financial markets had been volatile and financial conditions had tightened over the intermeeting period, as equity prices declined, corporate credit spreads widened, and the Treasury yield curve continued to flatten. Some participants commented that these de- velopments may reflect an increased focus among mar- ket participants on tail risks such as a sharp escalation of trade tensions or could be a signal of a significant slow- down in the pace of economic growth in the future. A couple of participants noted that the tightening in finan- cial conditions so far did not appear to be restraining real activity, although a more persistent tightening would un- doubtedly weigh on business and household spending. Participants agreed to continue to monitor financial market developments and assess the implications of these developments for the economic outlook. Participants commented on a number of risks associated with their outlook for economic activity, the labor mar- ket, and inflation over the medium term. Various factors that could pose downside risks for domestic economic growth and inflation were mentioned, including the pos- sibilities of a sharper-than-expected slowdown in global economic growth, a more rapid waning of fiscal stimu- lus, an escalation in trade tensions, a further tightening of financial conditions, or greater-than-anticipated neg- ative effects from the monetary policy tightening to date. A few participants expressed concern that longer-run in- flation expectations would remain low, particularly if economic growth slowed more than expected. With re- gard to upside risks, participants noted that the effects of fiscal stimulus could turn out to be greater than ex- pected and the uncertainties surrounding trade tensions or the global growth outlook could be resolved favora- bly, leading to stronger-than-expected economic out- comes, while a couple of participants suggested that tightening resource utilization in conjunction with an in- crease in the ability of firms to pass through increases in Minutes of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ input costs to consumer prices could generate undesira- ble upward pressure on inflation. A couple of partici- pants pointed to risks to financial stability stemming from high levels of corporate borrowing, especially by riskier firms, and elevated CRE prices. In general, par- ticipants agreed that risks to the outlook appeared roughly balanced, although some noted that downside risks may have increased of late. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants generally judged that the economy was evolving about as anticipated, with real economic activ- ity rising at a strong rate, labor market conditions con- tinuing to strengthen, and inflation near the Committee’s objective. Based on their current assessments, most par- ticipants expressed the view that it would be appropriate for the Committee to raise the target range for the fed- eral funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting. A few participants, however, favored no change in the target range at this meeting, judging that the absence of signs of upward inflation pressure afforded the Committee some latitude to wait and see how the data would de- velop amid the recent rise in financial market volatility and increased uncertainty about the global economic growth outlook. With regard to the outlook for monetary policy beyond this meeting, participants generally judged that some fur- ther gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would most likely be consistent with a sus- tained economic expansion, strong labor market condi- tions, and inflation near 2 percent over the medium term. With an increase in the target range at this meet- ing, the federal funds rate would be at or close to the lower end of the range of estimates of the longer-run neutral interest rate, and participants expressed that re- cent developments, including the volatility in financial markets and the increased concerns about global growth, made the appropriate extent and timing of future policy firming less clear than earlier. Against this backdrop, many participants expressed the view that, especially in an environment of muted inflation pressures, the Com- mittee could afford to be patient about further policy firming. A number of participants noted that, before making further changes to the stance of policy, it was important for the Committee to assess factors such as how the risks that had become more pronounced in re- cent months might unfold and to what extent they would affect economic activity, and the effects of past actions to remove policy accommodation, which were likely still working their way through the economy. Participants emphasized that the Committee’s approach to setting the stance of policy should be importantly guided by the implications of incoming data for the eco- nomic outlook. They noted that their expectations for the path of the federal funds rate were based on their current assessment of the economic outlook. Monetary policy was not on a preset course; neither the pace nor the ultimate endpoint of future rate increases was known. If incoming information prompted meaningful reassessments of the economic outlook and attendant risks, either to the upside or the downside, their policy outlook would change. Various factors, such as the re- cent tightening in financial conditions and risks to the global outlook, on the one hand, and further indicators of tightness in labor markets and possible risks to finan- cial stability from a prolonged period of tight resource utilization, on the other hand, were noted in this context. Participants discussed ideas for effectively communi- cating to the public the Committee’s data-dependent ap- proach, including options for transitioning away from forward guidance language in future postmeeting state- ments. Several participants expressed the view that it might be appropriate over upcoming meetings to re- move forward guidance entirely and replace it with lan- guage emphasizing the data-dependent nature of policy decisions. Participants supported a plan to implement another technical adjustment to the IOER rate that would place it 10 basis points below the top of the target range for the federal funds rate. This adjustment would foster trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the FOMC’s target range. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the Committee met in November indicated that the la- bor market had continued to strengthen and that eco- nomic activity had been rising at a strong rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Household spending had continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment had moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remained near 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed, on balance. Members generally judged that the economy had been evolving about as they had anticipated at the previous meeting. Though financial conditions had tightened and Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ global growth had moderated, members generally antic- ipated that growth would remain above trend and the labor market would remain strong. Members judged that some further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with sus- tained expansion of economic activity, strong labor mar- ket conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s sym- metric 2 percent objective over the medium term. After assessing current conditions and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- bers decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2¼ to 2½ percent. Members agreed that the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate would depend on their assessment of realized and expected economic condi- tions relative to the Committee’s maximum employment and symmetric 2 percent inflation objectives. They reit- erated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and in- ternational developments. More generally, members noted that decisions regarding near-term adjustments of the stance of monetary policy would appropriately re- main dependent on the evolution of the outlook as in- formed by incoming data. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed to modify the phrase “the Committee expects that further gradual increases” to read “the Committee judges that some further gradual increases.” The use of the word “judges” in the revised phrase was intended to better convey the data-dependency of the Committee’s decisions regarding the future stance of policy; the ref- erence to “some” further gradual increases was viewed as helping indicate that, based on current information, the Committee judged that a relatively limited amount of additional tightening likely would be appropriate. While members judged that the risks to the economic outlook were roughly balanced, they decided that recent devel- opments warranted emphasizing that the Committee would “continue to monitor global economic and finan- cial developments and assess their implications for the economic outlook.” At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective December 20, 2018, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2¼ to 2½ percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse re- purchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conven- tions) at an offering rate of 2.25 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such op- erations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each cal- endar month that exceeds $30 billion, and to in agency mortgage- continue reinvesting backed securities the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed secu- rities received during each calendar month that exceeds $20 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are ac- ceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November indicates that the labor market has continued to strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. House- hold spending has continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment has moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy remain near 2 percent. Indicators of longer- term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance. Minutes of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee judges that some further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be con- sistent with sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and in- flation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 per- cent objective over the medium term. The Committee judges that risks to the economic outlook are roughly balanced, but will continue to monitor global economic and financial devel- opments and assess their implications for the economic outlook. In view of realized and expected labor market conditions and inflation, the Committee de- cided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2¼ to 2½ percent. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: None. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances to 2.40 percent, effective December 20, 2018. The Board of Governors also voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point in- crease in the primary credit rate (discount rate) to 3.00 percent, effective December 20, 2018.6 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 29–30, 2019. The meeting adjourned at 10:50 a.m. on Decem- ber 19, 2018. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on November 28, 2018, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on November 7–8, 2018. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 6 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and San Francisco. This vote also encompassed ap- proval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 3.00 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Re- serve Banks, effective on the later of December 20, 2018, and the date such Reserve Banks informed the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas were informed by the Secretary of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 3.00 percent, effective December 20, 2018.) The second vote of the Board also encompassed ap- proval of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates. Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- tee (FOMC) meeting held on December 18–19, 2018, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2018 to 2021 and over the longer run.1 Each participant’s projections were based on infor- mation available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy— including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer- run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projec- tions represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to con- verge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.2 “Ap- propriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to fos- ter outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. All participants who submitted longer-run projections expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth in real GDP in 2019 would run somewhat above their individual estimate of its longer-run rate. Most par- ticipants continued to expect real GDP growth to slow throughout the projection horizon, with a majority of participants projecting growth in 2021 to be a little be- low their estimate of its longer-run rate. Almost all par- ticipants who submitted longer-run projections contin- ued to expect that the unemployment rate would run be- low their estimate of its longer-run level through 2021. Most participants projected that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would increase slightly over the next two years, and nearly all participants expected that it would be at or slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2020 and 2021. Compared with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from September, many participants marked down slightly their projections for real GDP growth and infla- tion in 2019. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary sta- tistics for the projections. As shown in figure 2, participants generally continued to expect that the evolution of the economy, relative to their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, would likely warrant some further gradual in- creases in the federal funds rate. Compared with the September submissions, the median projections for the federal funds rate for the end of 2019 through 2021 and over the longer run were a little lower. Most participants expected that the federal funds rate at the end of 2020 and 2021 would be modestly higher than their estimate of its level over the longer run; however, many marked down the extent to which it would exceed their estimate of the longer-run level relative to their September pro- jections. On balance, participants continued to view the uncer- tainty around their projections as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years. While most participants viewed the risks to the outlook as balanced, a couple more participants than in September saw risks to real GDP growth as weighted to the downside, and one less participant viewed the risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. The Outlook for Economic Activity The median of participants’ projections for the growth rate of real GDP for 2019, conditional on their individ- ual assessment of appropriate monetary policy, was 2.3 percent, slower than the 3.0 percent pace expected for 2018. Most participants continued to expect GDP growth to slow throughout the projection horizon, with the median projection at 2.0 percent in 2020 and at 1.8 percent in 2021, a touch lower than the median esti- mate of its longer-run rate of 1.9 percent. Relative to the September SEP, the medians of the projections for real GDP growth for 2018 and 2019 were slightly lower, while the median for the longer-run rate of growth was a bit higher. Several participants mentioned tighter fi- nancial conditions or a softer global economic outlook as factors behind the downward revisions to their near- term growth estimates. The median of projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2019 was 3.5 percent, unchanged from the September SEP and almost 1 percentage point below the median assessment of its longer-run normal level. With participants generally continuing to expect 1 Five members of the Board of Governors, one more than in September 2018, were in office at the time of the December 2018 meeting and submitted economic projections. 2 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ r e g n o L n u r 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 r e g n o L n u r 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 r e g n o L 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 8 1 0 2 e l b a i r a V , s t n e d i s e r p k n a B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F d n a s r e b m e m d r a o B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F f o s n o i t c e j o r p c i m o n o c E . 1 e l b a T 8 1 0 2 r e b m e c e D , y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p f o s t n e m s s e s s a l a u d i v i d n i r i e h t r e d n u 3 e g n a R 2 y c n e d n e t l a r t n e C 1 n a i d e M t n e c r e P 6 . 4 – 0 . 4 6 . 4 – 0 . 4 2 . 4 – 4 . 3 2 . 4 – 4 . 3 3 . 4 – 4 . 3 0 . 4 – 3 . 3 0 . 4 – 4 . 3 8 . 3 – 4 . 3 7 . 3 8 . 3 – 7 . 3 5 . 4 – 2 . 4 6 . 4 – 3 . 4 9 . 3 – 6 . 3 0 . 4 – 5 . 3 8 . 3 – 5 . 3 8 . 3 – 4 . 3 7 . 3 – 5 . 3 6 . 3 – 4 . 3 7 . 3 7 . 3 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 4 . 1 1 . 2 – 5 . 1 2 . 2 – 5 . 1 4 . 2 – 7 . 1 7 . 2 – 0 . 2 8 . 2 – 1 . 2 1 . 3 – 0 . 3 2 . 3 – 9 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 5 . 1 0 . 2 – 6 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 5 . 2 – 3 . 2 7 . 2 – 4 . 2 1 . 3 – 0 . 3 2 . 3 – 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 9 . 1 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 9 . 1 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 9 . 1 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 9 . 1 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 n u r 9 . 1 8 . 1 4 . 4 5 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 2 8 . 1 8 . 1 8 . 3 7 . 3 1 . 2 1 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 6 . 3 5 . 3 1 . 2 1 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 3 . 2 5 . 2 5 . 3 5 . 3 9 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 0 . 3 1 . 3 7 . 3 7 . 3 9 . 1 1 . 2 9 . 1 0 . 2 n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S P D G l a e r n i e g n a h C n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n U n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S 4 n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o C h t a p y c i l o p e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r P : o m e M n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P 5 . 3 – 5 . 2 5 . 3 – 5 . 2 6 . 3 – 4 . 2 1 . 4 – 1 . 2 6 . 3 – 4 . 2 9 . 3 – 1 . 2 1 . 3 – 4 . 2 6 . 3 – 1 . 2 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 0 . 3 – 5 . 2 0 . 3 – 8 . 2 1 . 3 – 6 . 2 6 . 3 – 9 . 2 4 . 3 – 9 . 2 6 . 3 – 1 . 3 1 . 3 – 6 . 2 4 . 3 – 9 . 2 4 . 2 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 8 . 2 0 . 3 1 . 3 4 . 3 1 . 3 4 . 3 9 . 2 1 . 3 4 . 2 4 . 2 n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e F s u o i v e r p e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t m o r f s e g n a h c t n e c r e p e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i f o s e r u s a e m h t o b r o f s n o i t c e j o r p d n a ) P D G ( t c u d o r p c i t s e m o d s s o r g l a e r n i e g n a h c f o s n o i t c e j o r P : e t o N n o i t p m u s n o c l a n o s r e p r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t , y l e v i t c e p s e r h t r u o f e h t n i e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u n a i l i v i c e g a r e v a e h t , n i r o f e g n a h c f o s e t a r e g a t n e c r e p e h t e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c d n a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t o t r a e y e r a e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r P . y g r e n e d n a d o o f g n i d u l c x e E C P r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t d n a ) E C P ( s e r u t i d n e p x e s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a e t n e s e r p e r s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a f o t n e m s s e s s a r e h r o s i h n o d e s a b e r a s n o i t c e j o r p s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a E . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q s n o i t c e j o r p e h T . y m o n o c e e h t o t s k c o h s r e h t r u f f o e c n e s b a e h t n i d n a y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a r e d n u e g r e v n o c o t d e t c e p x e e b d l u o w e l b a i r a v h c a e h c i h w o t e t a r e h t f o t n e m s s e s s a s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f l e v e l t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t r o e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f e g n a r t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t f o t n i o p d i m e h t f o e u l a v e h t e r a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f e e t t i m m o C t e k r a M n e p O l a r e d e F e h t f o g n i t e e m e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e d a m e r e w s n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S e h T . n u r r e g n o l e h t r e v o r o r a e y r a d n e l a c d e ﬁ i c e p s e h t f o d n e e h t t a e t a r h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o , e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t , P D G l a e r n i e g n a h c e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o l t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n O . 8 1 0 2 , 6 2 – 5 2 r e b m e t p e S n o . g n i t e e m , 8 1 0 2 , 9 1 – 8 1 r e b m e c e D e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i s n o i t c e j o r p h c u s t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n o d n a , g n i t e e m , 8 1 0 2 , 6 2 – 5 2 r e b m e t p e S e h t e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , n e v e s i s n o i t c e j o r p f o r e b m u n e h t n e h W . t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f d e g n a r r a e r a s n o i t c e j o r p e h t n e h w n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , d o i r e p h c a e r o F . 1 . r a e y t a h t n i e l b a i r a v t a h t r o f , t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f , s n o i t c e j o r p ’ s t n a p i c i t r a p l l a s e d u l c n i r a e y n e v i g a n i e l b a i r a v a r o f e g n a r . r a e y h c a e n i e l b a i r a v h c a e r o f s n o i t c e j o r p t s e w o l e e r h t d n a t s e h g i h e e r h t e h t s e d u l c x e y c n e d n e t l a r t n e c e h T e h T . d e t c e l l o c t o n e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . 2 . 3 . 4 . s n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m o w t e h t f o e g a r e v a Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2018–21 and over the longer run Change in real GDP Median of projections Central tendency of projections Range of projections Actual 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Unemployment rate 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 PCE inflation 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Core PCE inflation Percent 3 2 1 Longer run Percent 7 6 5 4 3 Longer run Percent 3 2 1 Longer run Percent 3 2 1 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate Percent 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par- ticipant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the unemployment rate to bottom out in 2019 or 2020, the median projections for 2020 and 2021 edged back up to 3.6 percent and 3.8 percent, respectively. Neverthe- less, most participants continued to project that the un- employment rate in 2021 would still be well below their estimates of its longer-run level. The median estimate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was slightly lower than in September. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- ployment rate from 2018 to 2021 and in the longer run. The distributions of individual projections for real GDP growth for 2019 and 2020 shifted down relative to those in the September SEP, while the distributions for 2021 and for the longer-run rate of GDP growth were little changed. The distribution of individual projections for the unemployment rate in 2019 was a touch more dis- persed relative to the distribution of the September pro- jections; the distribution moved slightly higher for 2020, while the distribution for the longer-run normal rate shifted toward the lower end of its range. The Outlook for Inflation The median of projections for total PCE price inflation was 1.9 percent in 2019, a bit lower than in the Septem- ber SEP, while the medians for 2020 and 2021 were 2.1 percent, the same as in the previous projections. The medians of projections for core PCE price inflation over the 2019–21 period were 2.0 percent, a touch lower than in September. Some participants pointed to softer in- coming data or recent declines in oil prices as reasons for shaving their projections for inflation. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri- butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in- flation. On the whole, the distributions of projections for total PCE price inflation and core PCE price infla- tion beyond this year either shifted slightly to the left or were unchanged relative to the September SEP. Most participants revised down slightly their projections of to- tal PCE price inflation for 2019. All participants ex- pected that total PCE price inflation would be in a range from 2.0 to 2.3 percent in 2020 and 2021. Most partici- pants projected that core PCE inflation would run at 2.0 to 2.1 percent throughout the projection horizon. Appropriate Monetary Policy Figure 3.E shows distributions of participants’ judg- ments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2018 to 2021 and over the longer run. The distributions for 2019 through 2021 were less dis- persed and shifted slightly toward lower values. Com- pared with the projections prepared for the September SEP, the median federal funds rate was 25 basis points lower over the 2019–21 period. For the end of 2019, the median of federal funds rate projections was 2.88 per- cent, consistent with two 25 basis point rate increases over the course of 2019. Thereafter, the medians of the projections were 3.13 percent at the end of 2020 and 2021. Most participants expected that the federal funds rate at the end of 2020 and 2021 would be modestly higher than their estimate of its level over the longer run; however, many marked down the extent to which it would exceed their estimate of the longer-run level rela- tive to their September projections. The median of the longer-run projections of the federal funds rate was 2.75 percent, 25 basis points lower than in September. In discussing their projections, many participants con- tinued to express the view that any further increases in the federal funds rate over the next few years would likely be gradual. That anticipated pace reflected a few factors, such as a short-term neutral real interest rate that is currently low and an inflation rate that has been rising only gradually to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Some participants cited a weaker near-term trajectory for economic growth or a muted response of inflation to tight labor market conditions as factors contributing to the downward revisions in their assessments of the ap- propriate path for the policy rate. Uncertainty and Risks In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast errors of various private and government forecasts over the past 20 years—for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are represented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts display the median SEP projections for the three varia- bles surrounded by symmetric confidence intervals de- rived from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the degree of uncertainty attending these projections is sim- ilar to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 percent probability of being within these con- fidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2018–21 and over the longer run 2018 December projections September projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Percent range 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Number of participants 2019 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Percent range 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Percent range 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Percent range 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Percent range 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2018–21 and over the longer run 2018 December projections September projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 2019 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2018–21 and over the longer run 2018 December projections September projections 2019 2020 2021 Longer run 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.9 2.0 Percent range Percent range Percent range Percent range Percent range 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.2 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂation, 2018–21 2018 December projections September projections 1.7 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Percent range 2019 2020 2021 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.4 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Percent range Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2018–21 and over the longer run 2018 Number of participants December projections September projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2019 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Variable 2018 2019 2020 2021 Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.6 ±2.1 ±2.1 Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.1 ±0.8 ±1.5 ±1.9 Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.2 ±1.0 ±1.0 ±1.0 Short-term interest rates3 . . . ±0.1 ±1.4 ±2.0 ±2.4 NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1998 through 2017 that were released in the winter by various private and government fore- casters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out- comes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschnei- der and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. uncertainty is substantial and generally increases as the forecast horizon lengthens. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- rounding their individual economic projections are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Participants generally continued to view the degree of uncertainty attached to their economic projections for real GDP growth and inflation as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years.3 A couple more partici- pants than in September viewed the uncertainty around the unemployment rate as higher than average. Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric around the median projections, they do not reflect any asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess- ments of the balance of risks to their economic projec- tions are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig- ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Most participants generally judged the risks to the outlook for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, headline inflation, and core infla- tion as broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly consistent with a symmetric fan chart. Two more par- ticipants than in September saw the risks to real GDP growth as weighted to the downside, and one less judged the risks as weighted to the upside. The balance of risks to the projection for the unemployment rate was un- changed, with three participants judging the risks to the unemployment rate as weighted to the downside and two participants viewing the risks as weighted to the up- side. In addition, the balance of risks to the inflation projections shifted down slightly relative to September, as one less participant judged the risks to both total and core inflation as weighted to the upside and one more participant viewed the risks as weighted to the downside. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, participants mentioned trade ten- sions as well as financial and foreign economic develop- ments as sources of uncertainty or downside risk to the growth outlook. For the inflation outlook, the effects of trade restrictions were cited as upside risks and lower en- ergy prices and the stronger dollar as downside risks. Those who commented on U.S. fiscal policy viewed it as an additional source of uncertainty and noted that it might present two-sided risks to the outlook, as its ef- fects could be waning faster than expected or turn out to be more stimulative than anticipated. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate were also subject to considera- ble uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the fed- eral funds rate in response to actual and prospective de- velopments over time in real GDP growth, the unem- ployment rate, and inflation, uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the federal funds rate importantly re- flects the uncertainties about the paths for those key eco- nomic variables along with other factors. Figure 5 pro- vides a graphical representation of this uncertainty, plot- ting the median SEP projection for the federal funds rate surrounded by confidence intervals derived from the re- sults presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the ap- propriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial and increases for longer horizons. 3 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici- pants’ projections. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.A. Uncertainty and risks in projections of GDP growth Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Percent Change in real GDP Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual 4 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about GDP growth December projections September projections Risks to GDP growth December projections September projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.B. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the unemployment rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Unemployment rate Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about the unemployment rate December projections September projections Risks to the unemployment rate December projections September projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.C. Uncertainty and risks in projections of PCE inﬂation Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Percent PCE inflation Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about PCE inflation December projections September projections Risks to PCE inflation December projections September projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about core PCE inflation December projections September projections Risks to core PCE inflation December projections September projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 5. Uncertainty in projections of the federal funds rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Percent Federal funds rate Midpoint of target range Median of projections 70% confidence interval* Actual 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com- mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The conﬁdence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to oﬀset the eﬀects of shocks to the economy. The conﬁdence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero—the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The conﬁdence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent conﬁdence interval if the conﬁdence interval has been truncated at zero. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 18–19, 2018Page 15_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- tial costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third and fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent con- fidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.8 to 2.2 per- cent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second, third, and fourth years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projec- tions for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion. However, in some instances, the risks around the pro- jections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemploy- ment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median pro- jection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig- ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par- ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summa- rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone- tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac- tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri- ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 



Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee January 29–30, 2019 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, January 29, 2019, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, January 30, 2019, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman John C. Williams, Vice Chairman Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Richard H. Clarida Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Randal K. Quarles Eric Rosengren Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Thomas A. Connors, Rochelle M. Edge, Beverly Hirtle, Daniel G. Sullivan, Christopher J. Waller, William Wascher, Jonathan L. Willis, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jennifer J. Burns, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Trevor A. Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian M. Doyle, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; David E. Lebow and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Edward Nelson and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of the long-run monetary policy implementation frameworks. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Marnie Gillis DeBoer,2 Associate Director, Division of Meredith Black, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Bank of Dallas Jeffrey D. Walker, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors David Altig and Sylvain Leduc, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and San Francisco, respectively Eric C. Engstrom, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, and Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Glenn Follette and Norman J. Morin, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Laura Lipscomb,2 and Zeynep Senyuz,2 Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Dana L. Burnett, Michele Cavallo,2 and Dan Li, Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Sean Savage, Senior Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Kurt F. Lewis, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Christopher L. Smith, Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Ayelen Banegas, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Luke Pettit,2 Senior Financial Institution and Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Pon Sagnanert, Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Yvette McKnight,3 Staff Assistant, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Bruce Fallick, Marc Giannoni, Susan McLaughlin,2 Anna Nordstrom,2 Angela O’Connor,2 Keith Sill, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Dallas, New York, New York, New York, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively Roc Armenter,2 Kathryn B. Chen,2 Joe Peek, Alexander L. Wolman, and Patricia Zobel,2 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, Boston, Richmond, and New York, respectively Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Economist and Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Annual Organizational Matters4 In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that ad- vices of the election of the following members and alter- nate members of the Federal Open Market Committee for a term beginning January 29, 2019, had been received and that these individuals had executed their oaths of of- fice. The elected members and alternate members were as fol- lows: John C. Williams, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with Michael Strine, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate Eric Rosengren, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, with Patrick Harker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alternate Charles L. Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with Loretta J. Mester, President of the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate James Bullard, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, with Robert S. Kaplan, President of the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate 3 Attended Tuesday session only. 4 Committee organizational documents are available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_au- thorizations.htm. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Esther L. George, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, with Neel Kashkari, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Com- mittee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2020: Chairman Vice Chairman Secretary Deputy Secretary Assistant Secretary Assistant Secretary Jerome H. Powell John C. Williams James A. Clouse Matthew M. Luecke David W. Skidmore Michelle A. Smith Mark E. Van Der Weide General Counsel Michael Held Richard M. Ashton Steven B. Kamin Thomas Laubach Stacey Tevlin Deputy General Counsel Assistant General Counsel Economist Economist Economist Thomas A. Connors Rochelle M. Edge Eric M. Engen Beverly Hirtle Daniel G. Sullivan Geoffrey Tootell Christopher J. Waller William Wascher Jonathan L. Willis Beth Anne Wilson Associate Economists By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was selected to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account (SOMA). By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Simon Pot- ter and Lorie K. Logan to serve at the pleasure of the Committee as manager and deputy manager of the SOMA, respectively, on the understanding that these se- lections were subject to their being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Secretary’s note: Advice subsequently was re- ceived that the manager and deputy manager se- lections indicated above were satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the Au- thorization for Domestic Open Market Operations with a revision that makes clear that small value tests for roll- overs and maturities are included in the $5 billion limit of the operational readiness testing program. The Guidelines for the Conduct of System Open Market Op- erations in Federal-Agency Issues remained suspended. AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS (As amended effective January 29, 2019) OPEN MARKET TRANSACTIONS 1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com- mittee”) authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee to execute open market trans- actions (the “Selected Bank”), to the extent necessary to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted by the Committee: A. To buy or sell in the open market securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to prin- cipal and interest by, the United States, and securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the United States, that are eligible for purchase or sale under Sec- tion 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (“Eligible Secu- rities”) for the System Open Market Account (“SOMA”): i. As an outright operation with securities dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained at the Selected Bank: on a same-day or deferred de- livery basis (including such transactions as are com- monly referred to as dollar rolls and coupon swaps) at market prices; or ii. As a temporary operation: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis, to purchase such Eligible Se- curities subject to an agreement to resell (“repo transactions”) or to sell such Eligible Securities sub- ject to an agreement to repurchase (“reverse repo transactions”) for a term of 65 business days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise authorized by the Committee, are determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual counterparties; B. To allow Eligible Securities in the SOMA to ma- ture without replacement; C. To exchange, at market prices, in connection with a Treasury auction, maturing Eligible Securities in the SOMA with the Treasury, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct obligations of the United States or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States; and _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 29–30, 2019Page 3 D. To exchange, at market prices, maturing Eligible Securities in the SOMA with an agency of the United States, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct obligations of that agency or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by that agency. SECURITIES LENDING In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 2. market operations, the Committee authorizes the Se- lected Bank to operate a program to lend Eligible Secu- rities held in the SOMA to dealers on an overnight basis (except that the Selected Bank may lend Eligible Securi- ties for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions). A. Such securities lending must be: i. At rates determined by competitive bidding; ii. At a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives of the program; iii. Subject to reasonable limitations on the total amount of a specific issue of Eligible Securities that may be auctioned; and limitations on the iv. Subject to reasonable amount of Eligible Securities that each borrower may borrow. B. The Selected Bank may: Reject bids that, as determined in its sole dis- i. cretion, could facilitate a bidder’s ability to control a single issue; ii. Accept Treasury securities or cash as collateral for any loan of securities authorized in this para- graph 2; and iii. Accept agency securities as collateral only for a loan of agency securities authorized in this para- graph 2. OPERATIONAL READINESS TESTING 3. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to undertake transactions of the type described in para- graphs 1 and 2 from time to time for the purpose of test- ing operational readiness, subject to the following limi- tations: A. All transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 shall be conducted with prior notice to the Commit- tee; B. The aggregate par value of the transactions au- thorized in this paragraph 3 that are of the type de- scribed in paragraph 1.A.i, 1.B, 1.C and 1.D shall not exceed $5 billion per calendar year; and C. The outstanding amount of the transactions de- scribed in paragraphs 1.A.ii and 2 shall not exceed $5 billion at any given time. TRANSACTIONS WITH CUSTOMER ACCOUNTS 4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments or other authorized services for foreign central bank and international accounts main- tained at a Federal Reserve Bank (the “Foreign Ac- counts”) and accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States pursuant to sec- tion 15 of the Federal Reserve Act (together with the Foreign Accounts, the “Customer Accounts”), the Com- mittee authorizes the following when undertaken on terms comparable to those available in the open market: A. The Selected Bank, for the SOMA, to undertake reverse repo transactions in Eligible Securities held in the SOMA with the Customer Accounts for a term of 65 business days or less; and B. Any Federal Reserve Bank that maintains Cus- tomer Accounts, for any such Customer Account, when appropriate and subject to all other necessary authorization and approvals, to: i. Undertake repo transactions in Eligible Securi- ties with dealers with a corresponding reverse repo transaction in such Eligible Securities with the Cus- tomer Accounts; and ii. Undertake intra-day repo transactions in Eligi- ble Securities with Foreign Accounts. Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts un- der the provisions of this paragraph 4 may provide for a service fee when appropriate. Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts are also subject to the authori- zation or approval of other entities, including the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and, when involving accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States, the United States Department of the Treasury. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ ADDITIONAL MATTERS 5. The Committee authorizes the Chairman of the Committee, in fostering the Committee’s objectives dur- ing any period between meetings of the Committee, to instruct the Selected Bank to act on behalf of the Com- mittee to: A. Adjust somewhat in exceptional circumstances the stance of monetary policy and to take actions that may result in material changes in the composition and size of the assets in the SOMA; or B. Undertake transactions with respect to Eligible Securities in order to appropriately address temporary disruptions of an operational or highly unusual nature in U.S. dollar funding markets. Any such adjustment described in subparagraph A of this paragraph 5 shall be made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and decision about the stance of policy at its most recent meeting and the Committee’s long-run objectives to foster maximum employment and price stability, and shall be based on economic, financial, and monetary developments since the most recent meet- ing of the Committee. The Chairman, whenever feasi- ble, will consult with the Committee before making any instruction under this paragraph 5. The Committee voted unanimously to reaffirm without revision the Authorization for Foreign Currency Opera- tions and the Foreign Currency Directive as shown be- low. AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS (As reaffirmed effective January 29, 2019) IN GENERAL 1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com- mittee”) authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to execute open market transactions for the System Open Market Ac- count as provided in this Authorization, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee: A. To purchase and sell foreign currencies (also known as cable transfers) at home and abroad in the open market, including with the United States Treas- ury, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with other entities in the open market. This authorization to purchase and sell foreign currencies encompasses purchases and sales through standalone spot or forward transactions and through foreign exchange swap transactions. For purposes of this Authorization, foreign exchange swap transactions are: swap transactions with the United States Treasury (also known as warehousing transactions), swap transactions with other central banks under reciprocal currency arrangements, swap transactions with other central banks under standing dollar liquidity and foreign currency liquidity swap ar- rangements, and swap transactions with other entities in the open market. B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding for- ward contracts to receive or to deliver, foreign curren- cies. 2. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall, unless otherwise authorized by the Committee, be conducted: A. In a manner consistent with the obligations re- garding exchange arrangements under Article IV of the Articles of Agreement of the International Mone- tary Fund (IMF).1 B. In close and continuous cooperation and consul- tation, as appropriate, with the United States Treasury. In consultation, as appropriate, with foreign C. monetary authorities, foreign central banks, and inter- national monetary institutions. D. At prevailing market rates. STANDALONE SPOT AND FORWARD TRANSACTIONS 3. For any operation that involves standalone spot or forward transactions in foreign currencies: A. Approval of such operation is required as fol- lows: The Committee must direct the Selected Bank i. in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and for- ward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Authorization, exceeding $5 billion since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the Committee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”) must direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the opera- tion if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the Committee is not feasible in the time avail- able. ii. The Committee authorizes the Subcommittee to direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 29–30, 2019Page 5 currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Au- thorization, totaling $5 billion or less since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the Commit- tee. B. Such an operation also shall be: i. Generally directed at countering disorderly market conditions; or ii. Undertaken to adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for currencies; or iii. Conducted for such other purposes as may be determined by the Committee. C. For purposes of this Authorization, the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregard- ing signs) of the dollar values of individual foreign cur- rencies purchased and sold, valued at the time of the transaction. WAREHOUSING 4. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank, with the prior approval of the Subcommittee and at the re- quest of the United States Treasury, to conduct swap transactions with the United States Exchange Stabiliza- tion Fund established by section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934 under agreements in which the Selected Bank purchases foreign currencies from the Exchange Stabilization Fund and the Exchange Stabilization Fund repurchases the foreign currencies from the Selected Bank at a later date (such purchases and sales also known as warehousing). RECIPROCAL CURRENCY ARRANGEMENTS, AND STANDING DOLLAR AND FOREIGN CURRENCY LIQUIDITY SWAPS 5. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements established under the North American Framework Agreement, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and stand- ing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements as pro- vided in this Authorization and to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Com- mittee. A. For reciprocal currency arrangements all draw- ings must be approved in advance by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee be- lieves that consultation with the Committee is not fea- sible in the time available). B. For standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the Chairman. The Chairman may approve a schedule of potential drawings, and may delegate to the manager, System Open Market Account, the authority to ap- prove individual drawings that occur according to the schedule approved by the Chairman. C. For standing foreign currency liquidity swap ar- rangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the Committee is not feasible in the time available). D. Operations involving standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements and standing foreign currency li- quidity swap arrangements shall generally be directed at countering strains in financial markets in the United States or abroad, or reducing the risk that they could emerge, so as to mitigate their effects on economic and financial conditions in the United States. E. For reciprocal currency arrangements, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing for- eign currency liquidity swap arrangements: Any new arrangements must be approved by i. All arrangements are subject to annual review and approval by the Committee; ii. the Committee; and iii. Any changes in the terms of existing arrange- ments must be approved in advance by the Chair- man. The Chairman shall keep the Committee in- formed of any changes in terms, and the terms shall be consistent with principles discussed with and guidance provided by the Committee. OTHER OPERATIONS IN FOREIGN CURRENCIES 6. Any other operations in foreign currencies for which governance is not otherwise specified in this Au- thorization (such as foreign exchange swap transactions with private-sector counterparties) must be authorized and directed in advance by the Committee. FOREIGN CURRENCY HOLDINGS 7. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to hold foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac- count in accounts maintained at foreign central banks, the Bank for International Settlements, and such other foreign institutions as approved by the Board of Gover- nors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee. A. The Selected Bank shall manage all holdings of foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac- count: Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Secondarily, to maintain a high degree of Primarily, to ensure sufficient liquidity to ena- i. ble the Selected Bank to conduct foreign currency operations as directed by the Committee; ii. safety; iii. Subject to paragraphs 7.A.i and 7.A.ii, to pro- vide the highest rate of return possible in each cur- rency; and iv. To achieve such other objectives as may be au- thorized by the Committee. B. The Selected Bank may manage such foreign cur- rency holdings by: Purchasing and selling obligations of, or fully i. guaranteed as to principal and interest by, a foreign government or agency thereof (“Permitted Foreign Securities”) through outright purchases and sales; ii. Purchasing Permitted Foreign Securities under agreements for repurchase of such Permitted For- eign Securities and selling such securities under agreements for the resale of such securities; and iii. Managing balances in various time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions approved by the Board of Governors under Regulation N. C. The Subcommittee, in consultation with the Committee, may provide additional instructions to the Selected Bank regarding holdings of foreign curren- cies. ADDITIONAL MATTERS 8. The Committee authorizes the Chairman: A. With the prior approval of the Committee, to en- ter into any needed agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the United States Treasury about the division of responsibility for foreign currency opera- tions between the System and the United States Treas- ury; B. To advise the Secretary of the United States Treasury concerning System foreign currency opera- tions, and to consult with the Secretary on policy mat- ters relating to foreign currency operations; C. To designate Federal Reserve System persons au- thorized to communicate with the United States Treasury concerning System Open Market Account foreign currency operations; and D. From time to time, to transmit appropriate re- ports and information to the National Advisory Coun- cil on International Monetary and Financial Policies. 9. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to undertake transactions of the type described in this Au- thorization, and foreign exchange and investment transactions that it may be otherwise authorized to undertake, from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness. The aggregate amount of such transactions shall not exceed $2.5 billion per calendar year. These transactions shall be conducted with prior notice to the Committee. 10. All Federal Reserve banks shall participate in the foreign currency operations for System Open Market Account in accordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Governors’ Statement of Procedure with Re- spect to Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944. 11. Any authority of the Subcommittee pursuant to this Authorization may be exercised by the Chairman if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Sub- committee is not feasible in the time available. The Chairman shall promptly report to the Subcommittee any action approved by the Chairman pursuant to this paragraph. 12. The Committee authorizes the Chairman, in excep- tional circumstances where it would not be feasible to convene the Committee, to foster the Committee’s ob- jectives by instructing the Selected Bank to engage in foreign currency operations not otherwise authorized pursuant to this Authorization. Any such action shall be made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and decisions regarding foreign currency operations. The Chairman, whenever feasible, will consult with the Com- mittee before making any instruction under this para- graph. __________________________ 1 In general, as specified in Article IV, each member of the IMF undertakes to collaborate with the IMF and other mem- bers to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates. These obligations include seeking to direct the member’s economic and financial policies toward the objective of fostering orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability. These obligations also include avoiding manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in such a way that would impede effective balance of payments adjustment or to give an unfair competi- tive advantage over other members. FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE (As reaffirmed effective January 29, 2019) 1. The Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to ex- ecute open market transactions, for the System Open Market Account, in accordance with the provisions of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations (the “Authorization”) and subject to the limits in this Di- rective. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 29–30, 2019Page 7 2. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to exe- cute warehousing transactions, if so requested by the United States Treasury and if approved by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”), subject to the limitation that the outstanding balance of United States dollars provided to the United States Treasury as a result of these transactions not at any time exceed $5 billion. 3. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to main- tain, for the System Open Market Account: A. Reciprocal currency arrangements with the fol- lowing foreign central banks: Foreign central bank Maximum amount (millions of dollars or equivalent) Bank of Canada Bank of Mexico 2,000 3,000 Standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements with B. the following foreign central banks: Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank C. Standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrange- ments with the following foreign central banks: Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank 4. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to hold and to invest foreign currencies in the portfolio in ac- cordance with the provisions of paragraph 7 of the Au- thorization. 5. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to report to the Committee, at each regular meeting of the Com- mittee, on transactions undertaken pursuant to para- graphs 1 and 6 of the Authorization. The Selected Bank is also directed to provide quarterly reports to the Com- mittee regarding the management of the foreign cur- rency holdings pursuant to paragraph 7 of the Authori- zation. 6. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to con- duct testing of transactions for the purpose of opera- tional readiness in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9 of the Authorization. By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed its Pro- gram for Security of FOMC Information. In the Committee’s annual reconsideration of the State- ment on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strat- egy, participants agreed that only a minor revision was required at this meeting, which was to update the refer- ence to the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment from 4.6 percent to 4.4 percent. All participants supported the statement with the revision, and the Committee voted unanimously to approve the updated statement. STATEMENT ON LONGER-RUN GOALS AND MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY (As amended effective January 29, 2019) The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, sta- ble prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy deci- sions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncer- tainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Inflation, employment, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and finan- cial disturbances. Moreover, monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity and prices with a lag. Therefore, the Committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its as- sessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily de- termined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expendi- tures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persis- tently above or below this objective. Communicating Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ this symmetric inflation goal clearly to the public helps keep longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhancing the Committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of signifi- cant economic disturbances. The maximum level of em- ployment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor mar- ket. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; ra- ther, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the maximum level of employment, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncer- tain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. Information about Committee participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rates of output growth and unem- ployment is published four times per year in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections. For ex- ample, in the most recent projections, the median of FOMC participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.4 percent. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s as- sessments of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under circum- stances in which the Committee judges that the objec- tives are not complementary, it follows a balanced ap- proach in promoting them, taking into account the mag- nitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to reaffirm these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organi- zational meeting each January. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The deputy manager of the System Open Market Ac- count (SOMA) provided an overview of developments in U.S. and global financial markets. Financial markets were quite volatile over the intermeeting period. Market participants pointed to a number of factors as contrib- uting to the heightened volatility and sustained declines in risk asset prices and interest rates over recent months including a weaker outlook and greater uncertainties for foreign economies (particularly for Europe and China), perceptions of greater policy risks, and the partial shut- down of the federal government. Against this backdrop, market participants appeared to interpret FOMC com- munications at the time of the December meeting as not fully appreciating the tightening of financial conditions and the associated downside risks to the U.S. economic outlook that had emerged since the fall. In addition, some market reports suggested that investors perceived the FOMC to be insufficiently flexible in its approach to adjusting the path for the federal funds rate or the pro- cess for balance sheet normalization in light of those risks. The deterioration in risk sentiment late in Decem- ber was reportedly amplified by poor liquidity and thin trading conditions around year-end. Early in the new year, market sentiment improved fol- lowing communications by Federal Reserve officials em- phasizing that the Committee could be “patient” in con- sidering further adjustments to the stance of policy and that it would be flexible in managing the reduction of securities holdings in the SOMA. On balance, stock prices finished the period up almost 5 percent while cor- porate risk spreads narrowed, reversing a portion of the changes in these variables since the September FOMC meeting. The deputy manager reported results from the Open Market Desk’s latest surveys of primary dealers and mar- ket participants. Regarding the outlook for policy, the median path for the federal funds rate among respond- ents had shifted down about 25 basis points relative to the responses from the surveys conducted ahead of the December meeting. Moreover, the average probability that respondents attached to an increase in the target range as the next policy action declined and the corre- sponding probabilities they attached to the possibility that the target range would be unchanged or lowered at some point this year increased. Concerning expectations for the FOMC statement, many survey respondents an- ticipated the retention of language pointing to the likeli- hood of “some further gradual increases” in the target range for the federal funds rate but many also expected the statement to emphasize patience or data dependence in the conduct of policy. Consistent with recent com- munications that the FOMC would be flexible in its ap- proach to balance sheet normalization, the survey results also suggested that the respondents anticipated that the Committee would slow the balance sheet runoff in sce- narios that involved a reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate. In reviewing money market developments, the deputy manager noted that federal funds continued to trade at rates close to the interest on excess reserves rate. More- _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 29–30, 2019Page 9 over, no signs of reserve scarcity were evident in the be- havior of the federal funds rate; the correlation between daily changes in reserve balances and the federal funds rate remained close to zero. In other markets, repur- chase agreement (repo) rates spiked at year-end, report- edly reflecting strong demands for financing from deal- ers associated with large Treasury auction net settle- ments on that day combined with a cutback in the supply of financing available from banks and others managing the size of their balance sheets over year-end for report- ing purposes. The deputy manager noted that the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of New York was planning to release a notice in early February for public comment on plans to include new data on selected deposits in the calcula- tion of the overnight bank funding rate (OBFR). In ad- dition, the staff had begun work aimed at publishing a series of backward-looking average secured overnight fi- nancing rates (SOFR) as a further step to support refer- ence rate reform. The staff planned to solicit public feedback on this effort later this year and initiate publi- cation of these averages by the first half of 2020. Following the briefing, participants raised a number of questions about market reports that the Federal Re- serve’s balance sheet runoff and associated “quantitative tightening” had been an important factor contributing to the selloff in equity markets in the closing months of last year. While respondents assessed that the reduction of securities held in the SOMA would put some modest upward pressure on Treasury yields and agency mort- gage-backed securities (MBS) yields over time, they gen- erally placed little weight on balance sheet reduction as a prime factor spurring the deterioration in risk sentiment over that period. However, some other investors report- edly held firmly to the belief that the runoff of the Fed- eral Reserve’s securities holdings was a factor putting significant downward pressure on risky asset prices, and the investment decisions of these investors, particularly in thin market conditions around the year-end, might have had an outsized effect on market prices for a time. Participants also discussed the hypothesis that investors may have taken some signal about the future path of the federal funds rate based on perceptions that the Federal Reserve was unwilling to adjust the pace of balance sheet runoff in light of economic and financial developments. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Long-Run Monetary Policy Implementation Frameworks Committee participants resumed their discussion from the December 2018 meeting of the appropriate long-run framework for monetary policy implementation. At the January meeting, the staff provided briefings on the ef- fectiveness and efficiency of the Committee’s current operating regime and on options for transitioning to the longer-run size of the balance sheet. The staff noted that the Committee had previously indi- cated that, in the longer run, it intends to operate with no more securities holdings than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. In consider- ing the effectiveness of the operating regime, the staff observed that over recent years, the Federal Reserve had been able to implement monetary policy in an environ- ment with ample reserves by adjusting administered rates—including the rates on required and excess reserve balances and the offered rate at the overnight reverse re- purchase agreement facility—without needing to ac- tively manage the supply of reserves. Over this period, the effective federal funds rate was generally steady at levels well within the Committee’s target range despite substantial changes in the level of reserves in the banking system and significant changes in money markets, regu- lations, and financial institutions’ business models. In addition, other money market rates generally moved closely with the federal funds rate. The current regime was therefore effective both in providing control of the policy rate and in ensuring transmission of the policy stance to other rates and broader financial markets. The staff briefing also included a discussion of factors relevant in judging the level of reserves that would sup- port the efficient implementation of monetary policy. The staff suggested that maintaining a buffer of reserves above the minimum quantity that corresponds to the flat portion of the reserve demand curve could reduce the size and frequency of open market operations needed to maintain good control of the policy rate. The aggregate level of reserves had already declined by $1.2 trillion from a peak level of $2.8 trillion reached in October 2014; the decline stemmed from both reductions in asset holdings and increases in nonreserve liabilities such as Federal Reserve notes in circulation. Some recent survey information and other evidence suggested that reserves might begin to approach an efficient level later this year. Against this backdrop, the staff presented options for substantially slowing the decline in reserves by ending the reduction in asset holdings at some point over the latter half of this year and thereafter holding the size of the SOMA portfolio roughly constant for a time so that Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the average level of reserves would fall at a very gradual pace reflecting the trend growth in other Federal Reserve liabilities. The staff also described options for communicating plans both for the operating regime and for the comple- tion of the normalization of the size of the balance sheet. If the Committee reached a decision to continue using its current operating regime, announcing this decision after the current meeting would help reduce uncertainty about both the long-run implementation framework and the likely evolution of the balance sheet. In addition, the Committee could revise its previous communications to make clear that it was flexible in its approach to normal- izing the balance sheet and was prepared to change the details of its balance sheet normalization plans in light of economic and financial developments if necessary to support the FOMC’s broader policy goals. The staff noted that, after the end of asset redemptions, the Desk could reinvest principal payments received from hold- ings of agency MBS in Treasury securities as directed. Participants noted some of the key advantages of the Federal Reserve’s current operating regime, including good control of the policy rate in a variety of conditions and good transmission to other money market rates and broader financial markets. They observed that a regime that controlled the policy rate through active manage- ment of the supply of reserves likely would have disad- vantages. In particular, the level and variability of re- serve demand and supply were likely to be much larger than in the period before the crisis, and stabilizing the policy rate in this environment would require large and frequent open market operations. Participants judged that, in light of their extensive previous discussions, it was now appropriate to provide the public with more certainty that the Federal Reserve would continue to use its current operating regime. Choosing an operating re- gime would also allow the Committee to move forward on related issues, including plans for concluding the nor- malization of the size of the balance sheet. Participants emphasized the importance of describing their chosen operating regime in clear terms to enhance public under- standing. Participants discussed market commentary that sug- gested that the process of balance sheet normalization might be influencing financial markets. Participants noted that the ongoing reduction in the Federal Re- serve’s asset holdings had proceeded smoothly for more than a year, with no significant effects on financial mar- kets. The gradual reduction in securities holdings had been announced well in advance and, as intended, was proceeding largely in the background, with the federal funds rate remaining the Committee’s primary tool for adjusting the stance of policy. Nonetheless, some inves- tors might have interpreted previous communications as indicating that a very high threshold would have to be met before the Committee would be willing to adjust its balance sheet normalization plans. Participants ob- served that, although the target range for the federal funds rate was the Committee’s primary means of ad- justing the stance of policy, the balance sheet normaliza- tion process should proceed in a way that supports the achievement of the Federal Reserve’s dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. Con- sistent with this principle, participants agreed that it was important to be flexible in managing the process of bal- ance sheet normalization, and that it would be appropri- ate to adjust the details of balance sheet normalization plans in light of economic and financial developments if necessary to achieve the Committee’s macroeconomic objectives. Almost all participants thought that it would be desirable to announce before too long a plan to stop reducing the Federal Reserve’s asset holdings later this year. Such an announcement would provide more certainty about the process for completing the normalization of the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. A substantial ma- jority expected that when asset redemptions ended, the level of reserves would likely be somewhat larger than necessary for efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy; if so, many suggested that some further very gradual decline in the average level of reserves, re- flecting the trend growth of other liabilities such as Fed- eral Reserve notes in circulation, could be appropriate. In these participants’ view, this process would allow the Federal Reserve to arrive slowly at an efficient level of reserves while maintaining good control of short-term interest rates without needing to engage in more fre- quent open market operations. A few participants judged that there would be little benefit to allowing re- serves to continue to fall after the end of redemptions or that this approach could have costs, such as an undue risk of volatility in short-term interest rates, that would exceed its benefits. These participants thought that upon ending asset redemptions, the Federal Reserve should begin adding to its assets to offset growth in non- reserve liabilities, so as to keep the average level of re- serves relatively stable. A couple of participants sug- gested that a ceiling facility to mitigate temporary unex- pected pressures in reserve markets could play a useful role in supporting policy implementation at lower levels of reserves. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 29–30, 2019Page 11 Participants commented that, in light of the Committee’s longstanding plan to hold primarily Treasury securities in the long run, it would be appropriate once asset re- demptions end to reinvest most, if not all, principal pay- ments received from agency MBS in Treasury securities. Some thought that continuing to reinvest agency MBS principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month in agency MBS, as under the current balance sheet normal- ization plan, would simplify communications or provide a helpful backstop against scenarios in which large de- clines in long-term interest rates caused agency MBS prepayment speeds to increase sharply. However, some others judged that retaining the cap on agency MBS re- demptions was unnecessary at this stage in the normali- zation process. These participants noted considerations in support of this view, including that principal payments were unlikely to reach the $20 billion level after 2019, that the cap could slightly slow the return to a portfolio of primarily Treasury securities, or that the Committee would have the flexibility to adjust the details of its bal- ance sheet normalization plans in light of economic and financial developments. Participants commented that it would be important over time to develop and communi- cate plans for reinvesting agency MBS principal pay- ments, and they expected to continue their discussion of balance sheet normalization and related issues at upcom- ing meetings. Following the discussion, the Chairman proposed that the Committee communicate its intentions regarding monetary policy implementation and its willingness to adjust the details of its balance sheet normalization pro- gram by publishing a statement at the conclusion of the meeting. All participants agreed with the proposed statement. STATEMENT REGARDING MONETARY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION AND BALANCE SHEET NORMALIZATION (Adopted January 30, 2019) After extensive deliberations and thorough re- view of experience to date, the Committee judges that it is appropriate at this time to provide additional infor- mation regarding its plans to implement monetary policy over the longer run. Additionally, the Committee is re- vising its earlier guidance regarding the conditions under which it could adjust the details of its balance sheet nor- malization program.5 Accordingly, all participants agreed to the following: • The Committee intends to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime in which an ample sup- ply of reserves ensures that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve's administered rates, and in which active management of the supply of reserves is not required. • The Committee continues to view changes in the target range for the federal funds rate as its primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy. The Committee is prepared to adjust any of the de- tails for completing balance sheet normalization in light of economic and financial developments. Moreover, the Committee would be prepared to use its full range of tools, including altering the size and composition of its balance sheet, if future economic conditions were to warrant a more accommodative monetary policy than can be achieved solely by re- ducing the federal funds rate. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available for the January 29–30 meeting indicated that labor market conditions continued to strengthen and that growth in real gross domestic prod- uct (GDP) was solid in the fourth quarter of last year, although the availability of data was more limited than usual because of the partial federal government shut- down that extended from December 22 to January 25. Consumer price the 12-month percentage change in the price index for per- sonal consumption expenditures (PCE), was a bit below 2 percent in November, held down in part by recent de- Survey-based clines in consumer energy prices. inflation, as measured by 5 The Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans were adopted on September 16, 2014, and are available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypol- icy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.pdf. On March 18, 2015, the Committee adopted an addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, which is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypol- icy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20150318.pdf. On June 13, 2017, the Committee adopted a second addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, which is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypol- icy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf. Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded strongly in December. The national unemployment rate edged up but was still at a low level of 3.9 percent, while the labor force participation rate also increased somewhat; as a re- sult, the employment-to-population ratio remained steady in December. The unemployment rates for Afri- can Americans, Asians, and Hispanics in December were below their levels at the end of the previous economic expansion, although persistent differentials in unem- ployment rates across groups remained. The share of workers employed part time for economic reasons con- tinued to be close to the lows reached in late 2007. The rates of private-sector job openings and quits edged down in November but were still at high levels; initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits through the middle of January were near historically low levels. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 3.2 per- cent over the 12 months ending in December. Industrial production increased solidly in December. Output gains were strong in the manufacturing and min- ing sectors, while the output of utilities declined, with warmer-than-usual temperatures lowering the demand for heating. Automakers’ assembly schedules suggested that the production of light motor vehicles would ease somewhat in the first quarter, although new orders in- dexes from national and regional manufacturing surveys pointed to moderate gains in overall factory output in the coming months. Household spending looked to have increased strongly in the fourth quarter, as real PCE growth was strong in October and November. The release of the retail sales report for December was delayed, but available indica- tors—such as credit card and debit card transaction data and light motor vehicle sales—suggested that household spending growth remained strong in December. Key factors that influence consumer spending—including ongoing gains in real disposable personal income and still-elevated measures of households’ net worth—con- tinued to be supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. Consumer sentiment, as measured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, was less upbeat in early January than it had been last year but re- mained at a generally favorable level. Real residential investment appeared to have declined again in the fourth quarter, likely reflecting in part de- creases in the affordability of housing arising from both the net increase in mortgage interest rates over the past year and ongoing, though somewhat slower, house price appreciation. Data on starts and permits for new resi- dential construction in December were not available, but building permit issuance for new single-family homes— which tends to be a good indicator of the underlying trend in construction of such homes—had moved down modestly in the previous couple of months. Sales of ex- isting homes decreased, on net, over November and De- cember, while data on new home sales for those two months were delayed. Growth in real private expenditures for business equip- ment and intellectual property looked to have picked up solidly in the fourth quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft rose, on bal- ance, in October and November, while information on shipments for December was delayed; available indica- tors of transportation equipment spending in the fourth quarter were strong. Forward-looking indicators of business equipment spending—such as orders for non- defense capital goods excluding aircraft and readings on business sentiment—pointed to somewhat slower spending gains in the near term. Data on nominal busi- ness expenditures for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector in November were not available. The number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—was roughly flat in December and through most of January. Total real government purchases appeared to have in- creased moderately in the fourth quarter. Nominal de- fense spending in October and November pointed to solid growth in real federal purchases, although spending data for December were delayed. The partial federal government shutdown restrained real federal purchases somewhat in the fourth quarter and likely had a more significant negative effect on federal purchases in the first quarter. Real purchases by state and local govern- ments looked to have risen modestly in the fourth quar- ter, as the payrolls of those governments expanded a bit over that period. Nominal state and local construction spending had risen solidly in October, but construction data for November were delayed. Data on U.S. international trade for November and De- cember also were delayed. The available data for Octo- ber suggested that the contribution of the change in net exports to real GDP growth in the fourth quarter would be much less negative than the drag of nearly 2 percent- age points in the third quarter. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.8 percent over the 12 months ending in November. Core PCE price inflation, which _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 29–30, 2019Page 13 excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.9 percent over that same period. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 1.9 percent over the 12 months ending in December, while core CPI inflation was 2.2 percent. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations—including those from the Michigan survey and the Desk’s Survey of Pri- mary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed. Recent data suggested that foreign economic growth was subdued in the fourth quarter relative to earlier in the year. In the advanced foreign economies (AFEs), espe- cially the euro area, indicators of economic activity weak- ened further, though they remained consistent with pos- itive economic growth. In the emerging market econo- mies (EMEs), growth in Mexico and Brazil appeared to have slowed to a modest pace in the fourth quarter after a temporary pickup in the third quarter. The Chinese economy expanded at a slower pace than earlier in the year amid notable weakness in household spending, and Chinese imports from other emerging Asian economies turned down. Foreign inflation fell in the fourth quarter, largely reflecting lower oil prices. Inflation pressures, es- pecially in some AFEs, generally remained muted. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investor risk sentiment fluctuated materially over the in- termeeting period. A variety of factors—including FOMC communications, weaker-than-expected data, trade policy uncertainties, the partial federal government shutdown, and concerns about the outlook for corpo- rate earnings—were cited by market participants as con- tributing to a deterioration in risk sentiment early in the period. During this time, broad equity indexes declined substantially amid a sharp rise in financial market vola- tility, and corporate bond spreads widened notably. Subsequently, positive signals regarding trade policy, ro- bust economic data releases, and communications from FOMC participants led to an improvement in risk senti- ment. On net, the S&P 500 index rose, option-implied volatility—the VIX—fell, Treasury yields declined, and corporate spreads narrowed over the intermeeting pe- riod. Despite the intermeeting moves in financial mar- kets, financial conditions remained notably tighter than in September 2018. Financing conditions for businesses and households tightened a bit further over the inter- meeting period but remained generally supportive of spending. December FOMC communications were reportedly per- ceived by market participants as not fully appreciating the implications of tighter financial conditions and sof- tening global data over recent months for the U.S. eco- nomic outlook. Subsequent communications from FOMC participants were interpreted as suggesting that the FOMC would be patient in assessing the implica- tions of recent economic and financial developments. The market-implied path for the federal funds rate in 2019 was little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period and investors continued to expect no change to the target range for the federal funds rate at the January FOMC meeting. The market-implied path for 2020 shifted down somewhat. Nominal Treasury yields fluctuated substantially, with heightened risk aversion contributing to a significant de- cline in yields early in the intermeeting period. Subse- quently, yields rose, though 2-, 5-, and 10-year yields still ended the period somewhat lower, on net. The spread between the yields on nominal 10- and 2-year Treasury securities was little changed over the period, and re- mained in the lower end of its historical range over re- cent decades. The near-term forward spread—the dif- ference between the current implied three-month for- ward rate at a horizon six quarters ahead (derived from the Treasury yield curve) and the current yield on a three-month Treasury bill—narrowed, on net, and also was in the lower end of its historical distribution. The 5-year and 5-to-10-year-forward inflation compensation measures based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securi- ties (TIPS) edged down a bit over the period; both measures were down significantly from levels prevailing in the fall of last year. In U.S. risky asset markets, the S&P 500 equity index was down as much as 8 percent at one point during the pe- riod but ended the period notably higher. On net, the VIX fell substantially while corporate bond spreads nar- rowed a bit. The federal funds rate and other overnight funding rates rose following the increase in the target range for the federal funds rate at the December FOMC meeting. Year-end pressures in repo markets were reportedly ex- acerbated by a high volume of settlements of Treasury securities against a backdrop of large dealer inventories and reduced intermediation by global systemically im- portant banks. General collateral repo rates moved up sharply at year-end but subsequently returned to normal levels. Foreign financial markets followed the same general pat- tern as those in the United States. On balance, foreign equity prices moved up moderately and sovereign credit Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ spreads in EMEs narrowed. Moreover, inflows to dedi- cated emerging market funds resumed after two quarters of outflows. Longer-term sovereign yields in AFEs edged lower on net. The dollar depreciated broadly amid falling U.S. yields and greater investor optimism about prospects for some EMEs. The dollar depreciated notably against the Brit- ish pound, on net, as market participants reportedly saw an increased likelihood of a delay in the Brexit process. The dollar also depreciated considerably against the Bra- zilian real and the Mexican peso following progress on pension reform in Brazil and a fiscal announcement in Mexico that was perceived as prudent. Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms tightened somewhat, on balance. Gross issuance of corporate bonds slowed considerably in December across the credit rating spectrum but rebounded in January. Even so, the volume of high-yield bonds issued by nonfinan- cial firms remained well below its average over the past few years. Spreads on nonfinancial corporate bonds were volatile but narrowed a bit, on net, and stayed at levels well above those that prevailed a year ago. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations continued to show signs of deterioration, although actual corporate bond defaults remained low overall. Institutional lever- aged loan issuance slowed in December to its lowest level since July 2016, as loan spreads widened substan- tially. Small business credit market conditions were little changed, and credit conditions in municipal bond mar- kets stayed accommodative on net. Private-sector analysts significantly revised down their projections for corporate earnings for the fourth quarter and for 2019 as a whole. The pace of gross equity issu- ance through both initial and seasoned offerings was sluggish in December, amid reports that several firms may have pushed back initial equity offerings. Respondents to the January 2019 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) re- ported that lending standards for commercial and indus- trial (C&I) loans remained basically unchanged in the fourth quarter, after having reported easing standards over the past several quarters. Growth of C&I loans on banks’ balance sheets picked up in the fourth quarter, reflecting stronger originations as well as reduced pay- downs and loan sales. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions remained accommodative. Although com- mercial mortgage backed securities (CMBS) spreads were volatile, they were little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period, and issuance of both agency and non-agency CMBS remained strong. CRE loan growth at banks continued to expand at a pace comparable with that seen over the course of 2018. Banks in the January SLOOS reported that demand was unchanged, on net, in the fourth quarter for nonfarm nonresidential loans, the largest CRE loan category, while demand was report- edly weaker for multifamily loans and construction loans. On balance, banks reported tightening their standards for all types of CRE loans in the fourth quar- ter. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market also remained accommodative for most borrowers. Pur- chase mortgage origination activity continued to decline modestly through November, while refinancing activity continued to be muted. In consumer credit markets, financing conditions tight- ened a bit but, on balance, remained generally supportive of growth in household spending. Banks reported in the SLOOS that they tightened credit card lending standards during the fourth quarter. In the consumer asset-backed securities market, spreads widened somewhat amid broad market volatility. The staff provided an update on its views with respect to potential risks to financial stability. The increase in financial market volatility seen over the fall of last year was characterized as a return to historically more typical levels, following the historically low-volatility environ- ment that persisted through much of 2017 and 2018. However, the increase in volatility in financial markets in December was viewed as substantial and as likely exac- erbated by thin year-end liquidity, among other factors. Staff judged asset valuation pressures in equity and cor- porate debt markets to have abated somewhat in the pe- riod since the assessment presented in the November 2018 financial stability report. Staff continued to moni- tor developments in the leveraged loan market given the sharp rise in spreads and slowdown in issuance late last year. The build-up in overall nonfinancial business debt to levels close to historical highs relative to GDP was viewed as a factor that could amplify adverse shocks to the business sector. Staff continued to judge risks asso- ciated with household-sector debt as moderate. Both the risks associated with financial leverage and the vul- nerabilities related to maturity transformation were viewed as being low, as they have been for some time. Staff Economic Outlook The U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for the January FOMC meeting was revised down a little, on balance, primarily reflecting somewhat lower projected _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 29–30, 2019Page 15 paths for domestic equity prices and foreign economic growth. The staff estimated that U.S. real GDP growth was solid in the fourth quarter of last year, bolstered by consumer spending and business investment, and that the effects of the partial federal government shutdown were quite small in that quarter. Real GDP growth was expected to slow but remain solid in the first half of this year, with the effects of the partial federal government shutdown modestly restraining GDP growth in the first quarter and those effects being reversed in the second quarter. In the medium term, real GDP growth in 2019 was forecast to be at a rate above the staff’s esti- mate of potential output growth, step down to the growth rate of potential output next year and then slow further to a pace below potential output growth in 2021. The unemployment rate was projected to decline some- what further below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate but to bottom out by the end of this year and begin to edge up in 2021. With labor market conditions judged to already be tight, the staff continued to assume that projected employment gains would manifest in smaller-than-usual downward pressure on the unem- ployment rate and in larger-than-usual upward pressure on the labor force participation rate. The staff’s forecast for inflation was little revised for the January FOMC meeting. Core PCE price inflation was still expected to step up to 2 percent over this year as a whole and then to run at that level through the medium term. Total PCE price inflation was forecast to be a little below core inflation this year and next, reflecting pro- jected declines in energy prices, and then to run at the same level as core inflation in 2021. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff also saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as roughly balanced. On the upside, household spending and business invest- ment could expand faster than the staff projected, sup- ported in part by the tax cuts enacted last year. On the downside, trade policies and foreign economic develop- ments could move in directions that have significant negative effects on U.S. economic growth. Risks to the inflation projection also were seen as balanced. The up- side risk that inflation could increase more than expected in an economy that was projected to move further above its potential was counterbalanced by the downside risk that longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than was assumed in the staff forecast, as well as the pos- sibility that the dollar could appreciate if foreign eco- nomic conditions deteriorated. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants agreed that over the intermeeting period the labor market had continued to strengthen and that eco- nomic activity had been rising at a solid rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Household spending had continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment had moderated from its rapid pace earlier last year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy had remained near 2 percent. Although mar- ket-based measures of inflation compensation had moved lower in recent months, survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed. Participants continued to view a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective as the most likely outcomes over the next few years. Participants generally continued to expect the growth rate of real GDP in 2019 to step down somewhat from the pace seen over 2018 to a rate closer to their estimates of longer-run growth, with a few participants commenting that waning fiscal stimulus was expected to contribute to the step-down. Several participants com- mented that they had nudged down their outlooks for output growth since the December meeting, citing a sof- tening in consumer or business sentiment, a reduction in the outlook for foreign economic growth, or the tight- ening in financial conditions that had occurred in recent months. In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that recent data on spending had been strong, sup- ported by a strong job market and rising incomes. A couple of participants commented that contacts in their Districts remained optimistic about consumer spending. However, some participants noted the recent softening in surveys of consumer sentiment. Participants ob- served that the recent partial federal government shut- down had presented a significant hardship for many families. A few participants also pointed to continued weakness in the housing sector, which was attributed in part to concerns about affordability among potential homebuyers. Participants noted that growth of business fixed invest- ment had moderated from its rapid pace earlier last year. Some participants highlighted that recent surveys of business sentiment or District contacts had indicated some weakening in optimism or confidence about the economic outlook, though available indicators suggested Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ that the level of business sentiment had remained high. Concerns about the economic outlook were variously at- tributed to uncertainty or worries about slowing global economic growth, including in Europe and China; trade policy; waning fiscal policy stimulus; and the partial gov- ernment shutdown. Manufacturing contacts in a num- ber of Districts indicated that such factors were causing them to delay or defer capital expenditures. In addition, a few participants noted that recent declines in oil or gas- oline prices had damped plans for capital expenditures in the energy sector. A few participants observed that conditions in the agricultural sector remained difficult, citing large inventories of agricultural commodities, un- certainty about international trade policies, and concerns regarding low prices of commodities and farmland. However, a few participants commented that business optimism had increased among contacts in their Dis- tricts, or that they were planning new capital expendi- tures. Participants observed that both overall inflation and in- flation for items other than food and energy remained near 2 percent on a 12-month basis. Participants con- tinued to view inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcome. Some participants noted that some factors, such as the decline in oil prices, slower growth and softer inflation abroad, or appreciation of the dollar last year, had held down some recent inflation readings and may continue to do so this year. In addition, many participants commented that upward pressures on inflation appeared to be more muted than they appeared to be last year despite strengthening labor market conditions and rising input costs for some industries. In their discussion of indicators of inflation expecta- tions, participants noted that market-based measures of inflation compensation had moved lower in recent months. Participants expressed a range of views in in- terpreting the decline in inflation compensation. On the one hand, that decline could stem from a decrease in ex- pected inflation on the part of market participants. In that case, the current low levels of inflation compensa- tion could suggest that inflation expectations are below the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. On the other hand, the decline in inflation compensation might reflect in large part declines in risk premiums or in- creased concerns about downside risks to the outlook for inflation. This interpretation was seen as consistent with the behavior of the most recent survey-based measures of expected inflation, which were little changed. In their discussion of labor markets, participants agreed that conditions had continued to strengthen. Estimates of job gains in the December employment report had been strong, the unemployment rate had remained low, and the labor force participation rate had moved up. Several participants noted solid rates of hiring or other indicators of tight labor market conditions in their Dis- tricts. Some participants commented on recent indica- tors at the national or District levels as suggesting a pickup in wage growth. The pickup was attributed to tightening in national or District labor market conditions or to gains in the rate of productivity growth. Continued solid productivity growth was seen as a key factor nec- essary to support rising real wages over time. Participants commented on a number of risks associated with their outlook for economic activity, the labor mar- ket, and inflation over the medium term. Participants noted that some risks to the downside had increased, in- cluding the possibilities of a sharper-than-expected slowdown in global economic growth, particularly in China and Europe, a rapid waning of fiscal policy stim- ulus, or a further tightening of financial market condi- tions. An increase in some foreign and domestic gov- ernment policy uncertainties, including those associated with Brexit, an escalation in international trade policy tensions, and the potential for additional extended fed- eral government shutdowns were also cited as downside risks. A few participants expressed concern that longer- run inflation expectations may be lower than levels con- sistent with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objec- tive. Several participants judged that risks that could lead to higher-than-expected inflation had diminished relative to downside risks. The potential that various sources of uncertainty might abate more quickly than ex- pected was mentioned as a potential upside risk for the economic outlook. In their discussion of financial developments, partici- pants noted that although financial market conditions had not changed much, on net, over the intermeeting period, prices had been volatile and financial conditions were materially tighter than they had been several months ago, with lower equity prices and wider corpo- rate risk spreads. Several participants also noted that the slope of the Treasury yield curve was unusually flat by historical standards, which in the past had often been as- sociated with a deterioration in future macroeconomic performance. Participants noted that financial asset prices appeared to be sensitive to information regarding trade policy tensions, domestic fiscal and monetary pol- icy, and global economic growth prospects. A couple of _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 29–30, 2019Page 17 participants noted that the rise in credit spreads over re- cent months, if it were to persist, could restrain future economic activity. Participants agreed that it was im- portant to continue to monitor financial market devel- opments and assess the implications of these develop- ments for the economic outlook. Among those participants who commented on financial stability, a number expressed concerns about the ele- vated financial market volatility and the apparent decline in investors’ willingness to bear risk that occurred to- ward the end of last year. Although these conditions had eased somewhat in recent weeks, a couple of participants noted that the strain in financial markets might have per- sisted or spread if it had occurred during a period of less favorable macroeconomic conditions. A couple of par- ticipants highlighted the role that decreased liquidity at the end of the year appeared to play in exacerbating changes in financial market conditions. They empha- sized the need to monitor financial market structures or practices that may contribute to strained liquidity condi- tions. A few participants highlighted the importance of ensuring that financial institutions were able to with- stand adverse financial market events—for instance, by maintaining adequate levels of capital. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants judged that information received since De- cember indicated that real economic activity had been rising at a solid rate, labor market conditions had contin- ued to strengthen, and inflation had been near the Com- mittee’s objective. Participants generally expected eco- nomic activity to continue expanding at a solid pace in the period ahead, with strong labor market conditions and inflation near 2 percent. At the time of the Decem- ber meeting, the Committee had noted that it would continue to monitor global economic and financial de- velopments and assess their implications for the eco- nomic outlook. Participants observed that since then, the economic outlook had become more uncertain. Fi- nancial market volatility had remained elevated over the intermeeting period, and, despite some easing since the December FOMC meeting, overall financial conditions had tightened since September. In addition, the global economy had continued to record slower growth, and consumer and business sentiment had deteriorated. The government policy environment, including trade negoti- ations and the recent partial federal government shut- down, was also seen as a factor contributing to uncer- tainty about the economic outlook. Based on their current assessments, all participants ex- pressed the view that it would be appropriate for the Committee to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. With regard to the Committee’s postmeeting statement, participants sup- ported a proposed change in the forward guidance lan- guage that would replace the previous guidance referring to “some further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate” with an indication that, in light of “global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures,” the Committee would “be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropri- ate.” Participants also supported a proposal to remove from the statement the characterization of risks to the economic outlook as “roughly balanced.” Participants pointed to a variety of considerations that supported a patient approach to monetary policy at this juncture as an appropriate step in managing various risks and uncertainties in the outlook. With regard to the do- mestic economic picture, additional data would help pol- icymakers gauge the trajectory of business and consumer sentiment, whether the recent softness in core and total inflation and inflation compensation would persist, and the effect of the tightening of financial conditions on ag- gregate demand. Information arriving in coming months could also shed light on the effects of the recent partial federal government shutdown on the U.S. econ- omy and on the results of the budget negotiations occur- ring in the wake of the shutdown, including the possible implications for the path of fiscal policy. A patient ap- proach would have the added benefit of giving policy- makers an opportunity to judge the response of eco- nomic activity and inflation to the recent steps taken to normalize the stance of monetary policy. Furthermore, a patient posture would allow time for a clearer picture of the international trade policy situation and the state of the global economy to emerge and, in particular, could allow policymakers to reach a firmer judgment about the extent and persistence of the economic slow- down in Europe and China. Participants noted that maintaining the current target range for the federal funds rate for a time posed few risks at this point. The current level of the federal funds rate was at the lower end of the range of estimates of the neutral policy rate. Moreover, inflation pressures were muted, and asset valuations were less stretched than they had been a few months earlier. Many participants sug- gested that it was not yet clear what adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropri- ate later this year; several of these participants argued that rate increases might prove necessary only if inflation outcomes were higher than in their baseline outlook. Page 18Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Several other participants indicated that, if the economy evolved as they expected, they would view it as appro- priate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate later this year. Participants observed that a patient posture in these cir- cumstances was consistent with their general approach to setting the stance of policy, in which they were im- portantly guided by the implications of incoming data for the economic outlook. Some participants noted that, while global economic and financial developments had been important factors leading to a patient monetary policy posture, those developments mattered because they affected assessments of the policy rate path most consistent with achievement of the Committee’s dual- mandate goals of maximum employment and price sta- bility. Many participants observed that if uncertainty abated, the Committee would need to reassess the char- acterization of monetary policy as “patient” and might then use different statement language. A few participants expressed concerns that in the current environment of increased uncertainty, the policy rate projections prepared as part of the Summary of Eco- nomic Projections (SEP) do not accurately convey the Committee’s policy outlook. These participants were concerned that, although the individual participants’ projections for the federal funds rate in the SEP reflect their individual views of the appropriate path for the pol- icy rate conditional on the evolution of the economic outlook, at times the public had misinterpreted the me- dian or central tendency of those projections as repre- senting the consensus view of the Committee or as sug- gesting that policy was on a preset course. However, some other participants noted that the policy rate pro- jections in the SEP are a valuable component of the overall information provided about the monetary policy outlook. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that information received since the Committee met in December indicated that the labor market had continued to strengthen and that economic activity had been rising at a solid rate. Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate had remained low. Household spending had continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment had moderated from its rapid pace ear- lier last year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy re- mained near 2 percent. Although market-based measures of inflation compensation had moved lower in recent months, survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed. In their consideration of the economic outlook, mem- bers noted that financial conditions had tightened, on net, since September, and that global growth had mod- erated; members also observed that a number of uncer- tainties, including those pertaining to the evolution of policies of the U.S. and foreign governments, still awaited resolution. However, members continued to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Commit- tee’s symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes for the U.S. economy in the period ahead. In light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee could be pa- tient as it determined what future adjustments to the tar- get range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. After assessing current conditions and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- bers decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. Members agreed that in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Com- mittee would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum em- ployment and symmetric 2 percent inflation objectives. They reiterated that this assessment would take into ac- count a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pres- sures and inflation expectations, and readings on finan- cial and international developments. More generally, members noted that decisions regarding near-term ad- justments of the stance of monetary policy would appro- priately remain dependent on the evolution of the out- look as informed by incoming data. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed to change the characterization of recent growth in economic activity from “strong” to “solid,” consistent with incoming information that suggested that the pace of expansion of the U.S. economy had moderated some- what since late last year. The description of indicators of inflation expectations was revised to recognize that the downward moves in market-based measures of in- flation compensation that occurred in recent months had been sustained, while also noting that survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were lit- tle changed. Members also agreed to several adjust- ments in the description of the outlook for the economy _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 29–30, 2019Page 19 and monetary policy. The statement language was re- vised to indicate that the Committee continued to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near 2 percent as “the most likely outcomes.” Members also agreed to add a sentence indicating that, in light of “global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will be patient as it determines what fu- ture adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes.” This sentence was intended to convey the Committee’s view that a patient and flexible approach was appropriate at this time as a way to manage risks while assessing in- coming information bearing on the economic outlook. In light of the range of uncertainties associated with global economic and financial developments, the Com- mittee decided that it was not useful at this time to ex- press a judgment about the balance of risks. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective January 31, 2019, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2¼ to 2½ percent, including overnight re- verse repurchase operations (and reverse repur- chase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate week- end, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 2.25 percent, in amounts lim- ited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each cal- endar month that exceeds $30 billion, and to in agency mortgage- continue reinvesting backed securities the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed secu- rities received during each calendar month that exceeds $20 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are ac- ceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December indicates labor market has continued to that the strengthen and that economic activity has been rising at a solid rate. Job gains have been strong, on average, in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate has remained low. Household spending has continued to grow strongly, while growth of business fixed investment has mod- erated from its rapid pace earlier last year. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and infla- tion for items other than food and energy re- main near 2 percent. Although market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved lower in recent months, survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. The Committee continues to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective as the most likely outcomes. In light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will be patient as it determines what future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of Page 20Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Richard H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Randal K. Quarles, and Eric Rosengren. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances unchanged at 2.40 percent and voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 3.00 percent, effective January 31, 2019. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, March 19–20, 2019. The meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. on January 30, 2019. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on January 8, 2019, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 18–19, 2018. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 29–30, 2019Page 21 

Page 1 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee March 19–20, 2019 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 19, 2019, at on Wednesday, continued 10:00 a.m. March 20, 2019, at 9:00 a.m.1 and PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Richard H. Clarida Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Randal K. Quarles Eric Rosengren Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Thomas A. Connors, Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, Christopher J. Waller, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Trevor A. Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian M. Doyle, Wendy E. Dunn, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Joshua Gallin and David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Marnie Gillis DeBoer2 and David López-Salido, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 2 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Andrew Figura, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Laura Lipscomb,2 Zeynep Senyuz,2 and Rebecca Zarutskie, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors New York, Chicago, New York, and New York, respectively Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Economist and Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Daniel Cooper, Senior Economist and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Michele Cavallo,2 Section Chief, Division of Monetary Ellen Correia Golay,2 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Affairs, Board of Governors Bank of New York Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office A. Lee Smith, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of the Secretary, Board of Governors of Kansas City Mark A. Carlson, Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Martin Bodenstein, Marcel A. Priebsch, and Bernd Schlusche,2 Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mary-Frances Styczynski,2 Lead Financial Institution and Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Gregory L. Stefani, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Michael Dotsey, Glenn D. Rudebusch, Ellis W. Tallman, and Joseph S. Tracy, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Cleveland, and Dallas, respectively Antoine Martin,2 Julie Ann Remache,2 and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, New York, and Minneapolis, respectively Roc Armenter,2 Kathryn B. Chen,2 Hesna Genay, Jonathan P. McCarthy, and Patricia Zobel,2 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. Balance Sheet Normalization Committee participants resumed their discussion from the January 2019 meeting on options for transitioning to the longer-run size of the balance sheet. The staff de- scribed options for ending the reduction in the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings at the end of September 2019 and for potentially reducing the pace of redemp- tions of Treasury securities before that date. Reducing the pace of redemptions before ending them would be consistent with most previous changes in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet policy and would support a grad- ual transition to the long-run level of reserves. It could also reinforce the Committee’s communications indicat- ing that the FOMC was flexible in its plans for balance sheet normalization and that the process of balance sheet normalization would remain consistent with the at- tainment of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy ob- jectives. However, continuing redemptions at the cur- rent pace through September might be simpler to com- municate and would somewhat shorten the transition to the long-run level of reserves. The staff noted that re- ducing the pace of redemptions before September would leave reserves and the balance sheet slightly larger than continuing redemptions at the current pace through September. However, the longer-run level of reserves and size of the balance sheet would ultimately be deter- mined by long-term demand for Federal Reserve liabili- ties. Staff projections of term premiums and macroeco- nomic outcomes did not differ substantially across the two options. The staff also described a possible interim plan for rein- vesting principal payments received from agency debt Page 3 Minutes of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) after bal- ance sheet runoff ends and until the Committee decides on the longer-run composition of the System Open Mar- ket Account (SOMA) portfolio. Consistent with the Committee’s long-standing aim to hold primarily Treas- ury securities in the longer run, any principal payments on agency debt and agency MBS would generally be re- invested in Treasury securities in the secondary market. These reinvestments would be allocated across sectors of the Treasury market roughly in proportion to the ma- turity composition of Treasury securities outstanding. However, the plan would maintain the existing $20 bil- lion per month cap on MBS redemptions; principal pay- ments on agency debt and agency MBS above $20 billion per month would continue to be reinvested in agency MBS. This cap would limit the pace at which the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS holdings could decline if prepay- ments accelerated; the staff projected that the redemp- tion cap on agency debt and agency MBS was unlikely to be reached after 2019. The staff noted that, once balance sheet runoff ended, the average level of reserves would tend to decline grad- ually, in line with trend growth in the Federal Reserve’s nonreserve liabilities, until the Committee chose to re- sume growth of the balance sheet in order to maintain a level of reserves consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation. Participants judged that ending the runoff of securities holdings at the end of September would reduce uncer- tainty about the Federal Reserve’s plans for its securities holdings and would be consistent with the Committee’s decision at its January 2019 meeting to continue imple- menting monetary policy in a regime of ample reserves. Participants discussed advantages and disadvantages of slowing balance sheet runoff before the September stop- ping date. A slowing in the pace of redemptions would accord with the Committee’s general practice of adjust- ing its holdings of securities smoothly and predictably, which might reduce the risk that market volatility would arise in connection with the conclusion of the runoff of securities holdings. However, these advantages needed to be weighed against the additional complexity of a plan that would end balance sheet runoff in steps rather than all at once. Participants reiterated their support for the FOMC’s in- tention to return to holding primarily Treasury securities in the long run. Participants judged that adopting an in- terim approach for reinvesting agency debt and agency MBS principal payments into Treasury securities across a range of maturities was appropriate while the Commit- tee continued to evaluate potential long-run maturity structures for the Federal Reserve’s portfolio of Treas- ury securities. Many participants offered preliminary views on advantages and disadvantages of alternative compositions for the SOMA portfolio. Participants ex- pected to further discuss the longer-run composition of the portfolio at upcoming meetings. Participants commented on considerations related to al- lowing the average level of reserves to decline in line with trend growth in nonreserve liabilities for a time af- ter the end of balance sheet runoff. Several participants preferred to stabilize the average level of reserves by re- suming purchases of Treasury securities relatively soon after the end of runoff, because they saw little benefit to further declines in reserve balances or because they thought the Committee should minimize the risk of in- terest rate volatility that could occur if the supply of re- serves dropped below a point consistent with efficient and effective implementation of policy. Some others preferred to allow the average level of reserves to con- tinue to decline for a longer time after balance sheet run- off ends because such declines could allow the Commit- tee to learn more about underlying reserve demand, be- cause they judged that such a process was not likely to result in excessive volatility in money market rates, or because they judged that moving to lower levels of re- serves was more consistent with the Committee’s previ- ous communications indicating that it would hold no more securities than necessary for implementing mone- tary policy efficiently and effectively. Participants noted that the eventual resumption of purchases of securities to keep pace with growth in demand for the Federal Re- serve’s liabilities, whenever it occurred, would be a nor- mal part of operations to maintain the ample-reserves monetary policy implementation regime and would not represent a change in the stance of monetary policy. Some participants suggested that, at future meetings, the Committee should discuss the potential benefits and costs of tools that might reduce reserve demand or sup- port interest rate control. Following the discussion, the Chair proposed that the Committee communicate its intentions regarding bal- ance sheet normalization by publishing a statement at the conclusion of the meeting. All participants agreed that it was appropriate to issue the proposed statement. Page 4 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ BALANCE SHEET NORMALIZATION PRINCIPLES AND PLANS (Adopted March 20, 2019) In light of its discussions at previous meetings and the progress in normalizing the size of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings and the level of reserves in the bank- ing system, all participants agreed that it is appropriate at this time for the Committee to provide additional infor- mation regarding its plans for the size of its securities holdings and the transition to the longer-run operating regime. At its January meeting, the Committee stated that it intends to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime in which an ample supply of reserves ensures that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve’s adminis- tered rates and in which active management of the sup- ply of reserves is not required. The Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization released in January as well as the princi- ples and plans listed below together revise and replace the Committee’s earlier Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. (cid:120) To ensure a smooth transition to the longer-run level of reserves consistent with efficient and effec- tive policy implementation, the Committee intends to slow the pace of the decline in reserves over com- ing quarters provided that the economy and money market conditions evolve about as expected. o The Committee intends to slow the reduction of its holdings of Treasury securities by reduc- ing the cap on monthly redemptions from the current level of $30 billion to $15 billion begin- ning in May 2019. o The Committee intends to conclude the reduc- tion of its aggregate securities holdings in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) at the end of September 2019. o The Committee intends to continue to allow its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS) to decline, consistent with the aim of holding primarily Treasury se- curities in the longer run. (cid:131) Beginning in October 2019, principal pay- ments received from agency debt and agency MBS will be reinvested in Treasury securities subject to a maximum amount of (cid:131) (cid:131) $20 billion per month; any principal pay- ments in excess of that maximum will con- tinue to be reinvested in agency MBS. Principal payments from agency debt and agency MBS below the $20 billion maxi- mum will initially be invested in Treasury securities across a range of maturities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities outstanding; the Com- mittee will revisit this reinvestment plan in connection with its deliberations regarding the longer-run composition of the SOMA portfolio. It continues to be the Committee’s view that limited sales of agency MBS might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings. The timing and pace of any sales would be communicated to the public well in advance. o The average level of reserves after the FOMC has concluded the reduction of its aggregate se- curities holdings at the end of September will likely still be somewhat above the level of re- serves necessary to efficiently and effectively implement monetary policy. (cid:131) In that case, the Committee currently antic- ipates that it will likely hold the size of the SOMA portfolio roughly constant for a time. During such a period, persistent grad- ual increases in currency and other non- reserve liabilities would be accompanied by corresponding gradual declines in reserve balances to a level consistent with efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy. o When the Committee judges that reserve bal- ances have declined to this level, the SOMA portfolio will hold no more securities than nec- essary for efficient and effective policy imple- mentation. Once that point is reached, the Committee will begin increasing its securities holdings to keep pace with trend growth of the Federal Reserve’s non-reserve liabilities and maintain an appropriate level of reserves in the system. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager of the SOMA discussed developments in global financial markets over the intermeeting period. In Page 5 Minutes of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ the United States, equity indexes moved higher and credit spreads tightened. Market participants attributed these moves largely to a perceived shift in the FOMC’s approach to policy following communications stressing that the Committee would be patient in assessing the need for future adjustments in the target range for the federal funds rate and would be flexible on balance sheet policy. In Europe, measures announced by the European Cen- tral Bank (ECB) in March, including an extension of for- ward guidance on interest rates and the announcement of another round of targeted long-term refinancing op- erations, were followed by a decline in euro-area equity markets, particularly bank stocks, as well as declines in euro-area rates. Market contacts attributed the price re- action to a perception that the measures were not as stimulative as might have been expected, given down- ward revisions in the ECB’s growth and inflation fore- casts. In China, authorities moved toward an easier fis- cal and monetary stance; China’s aggregate credit growth had rebounded slightly in recent months relative to the declining trend observed last year. The Shanghai Com- posite index had risen notably since the turn of the year, driven in part by fiscal and monetary stimulus measures as well as perceived progress on trade negotiations. De- velopments around Brexit remained a source of market uncertainty. Consistent with ongoing investor uncer- tainty over the outcome, risk reversals on the pound– dollar currency pair continued to point to higher de- mand for protection against pound depreciation relative to the dollar. The deputy manager provided an overview of money market developments and policy implementation over the intermeeting period. The effective federal funds rate (EFFR) continued to be very stable at a level equal to the interest rate on excess reserves. Rates in overnight se- cured markets continued to exhibit some volatility, par- ticularly on month-end dates. Market participants at- tributed some of the volatility in overnight secured rates to persistently high net dealer inventories of Treasury se- curities and to Treasury issuance coinciding with the month-end statement dates. Over the upcoming inter- meeting period, with the combination of changes in the Treasury’s balances at the Federal Reserve and additional asset redemptions, reserves were expected to decline to a new low of around $1.4 trillion by early May, with some notable fluctuations in reserves on days associated with tax flows. The deputy manager also discussed the transition to a long-run regime of ample reserves, following the Com- mittee’s January announcement that it intends to con- tinue to implement monetary policy in such a regime. Once the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet has normalized, the Open Market Desk will at some point need to conduct open market operations to maintain a level of reserves in the banking system that the Commit- tee deems appropriate. In doing so, the Desk will need to assess banks’ demand for reserves as well as forecast other Federal Reserve liabilities and plan operations to maintain a supply of reserves sufficient to ensure that control over short-term interest rates is exercised pri- marily through the setting of administered rates. The deputy manager described a possible operational ap- proach in an ample-reserves regime based on establish- ing a minimum operating level that would be a lower bound on the daily level of reserves. The assessment of the minimum operating level of reserves would be based on a range of information, including surveys of banks and market participants, data on banks’ reserve holdings, and market monitoring. Under the proposed approach, the Desk would plan open market operations to main- tain the daily level of reserves above the minimum oper- ating level. Consistent with the Committee’s intention to maintain a regime that does not require active man- agement of the supply of reserves, the Desk could plan these open market operations over a medium-term hori- zon. The average level of reserves over the medium term would then be above the minimum operating level, providing a buffer of reserves to absorb daily changes in nonreserve liabilities. Following the manager and deputy manager’s report, some participants commented on various aspects of the minimum operating level approach. Decisions regarding how far to allow reserves to decline would need to bal- ance important tradeoffs. On the one hand, a lower minimum operating level might increase the risk of ex- cessive interest rate volatility. On the other hand, a lower minimum operating level could provide more op- portunities to learn about underlying reserve demand or could be viewed as more consistent with moving to the smallest securities holdings necessary for efficient and effective monetary policy implementation. However, the scope for reducing the level of reserves much further after the end of balance sheet runoff might be fairly lim- ited. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. Page 6 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available for the March 19–20 meeting indicated that labor market conditions remained strong, although growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) appeared to have slowed markedly in the first quarter of this year from its solid fourth-quarter pace. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption ex- penditures (PCE), was somewhat below 2 percent in De- cember, held down in part by recent declines in con- sumer energy prices, while PCE price inflation for items other than food and energy was close to 2 percent; more recent readings on PCE price inflation were delayed by the earlier federal government shutdown. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. Increases in total nonfarm payroll employment re- mained solid, on average, in recent months; employment rose only a little in February but had expanded strongly in January. The national unemployment rate edged down, on net, over the past two months to 3.8 percent in February, and both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio rose slightly on balance. The unemployment rates for African Ameri- cans, Asians, and Hispanics in February were at or below their levels at the end of the previous economic expan- sion, though persistent differentials in unemployment rates across groups remained. The share of workers em- ployed part time for economic reasons moved down in February and was below the lows reached in late 2007. The rate of private-sector job openings in January was the same as its fourth-quarter average and remained ele- vated, while the rate of quits edged up in January; the four-week moving average of initial claims for unem- ployment insurance benefits through early March was still near historically low levels. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in February, a significantly faster pace than a year earlier. The employment cost index for private-sector workers increased 3 percent over the 12 months ending in December, somewhat faster than a year earlier. Total labor compensation per hour in the business sector in- creased 2.9 percent over the four quarters of 2018, about the same rate as a year earlier. Industrial production declined in January and rebounded only somewhat in February. Moreover, manufacturing output decreased over both months, as production in the motor vehicle and parts sector contracted notably in January and declines were more broad based in Febru- ary. Production in the mining and utilities sectors ex- panded, on net, over the past two months. Automakers’ assembly schedules suggested that the production of light motor vehicles would be roughly flat in the near term, and new orders indexes from national and regional manufacturing surveys pointed to only modest gains in overall factory output in the coming months. Household spending looked to be slowing around the turn of the year. Real PCE decreased markedly in De- cember after a solid increase in the previous month, and the components of the nominal retail sales data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to estimate PCE rebounded only partially in January. Key factors that influence consumer spending—including a low un- employment rate, ongoing gains in real labor compensa- tion, and still elevated measures of households’ net worth—were supportive of a pickup in consumer spending to a solid pace in the near term. In addition, consumer sentiment, as measured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, stepped up in February and early March to an upbeat level. Real residential investment appeared to be softening fur- ther in the first quarter, likely reflecting, in part, de- creases in the affordability of housing arising from both the net increase in mortgage interest rates over the past year and ongoing house price appreciation. Starts of new single-family homes increased slightly, on net, over December and January, while starts of multifamily units declined. Building permit issuance for new single-family homes—which tends to be a good indicator of the un- derlying trend in construction of such homes—moved down over those two months. In addition, sales of both new and existing homes decreased in January. Growth in real private expenditures for business equip- ment and intellectual property looked to be slowing in the first quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense cap- ital goods excluding aircraft rose in December and Jan- uary, while available indicators pointed to a decrease in transportation equipment spending in the first quarter after a strong fourth-quarter gain. Forward-looking in- dicators of business equipment spending—such as or- ders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft and readings on business sentiment—pointed to sluggish in- creases in the near term. Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector increased in December and January. In addition, the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in Page 7 Minutes of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ operation—an indicator of business spending for struc- tures in the drilling and mining sector—expanded, on balance, in February and through the middle of March. a modest pickup in China. Inflation in foreign econo- mies slowed further early this year, partly reflecting lower retail energy prices across both AFEs and EMEs. Total real government purchases appeared to be moving sideways in the first quarter. Relatively strong increases in real federal defense purchases were likely to be roughly offset by an expected decline in real nondefense purchases stemming from the effects of the partial fed- eral government shutdown. Real purchases by state and local governments looked to be rising modestly in the first quarter, as the payrolls of those governments ex- panded a bit in January and February, and nominal state and local construction spending rose, on net, in Decem- ber and January. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in November before widening in December to the largest deficit since 2008. Exports declined in November and December, as exports of industrial supplies and automo- tive products fell in both months. Imports decreased in November before partially recovering in December, with imports of consumer goods and industrial supplies driving this swing. The BEA estimated that the change in net exports was a drag of about ¼ percentage point on the rate of real GDP growth in the fourth quarter. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.7 percent over the 12 months ending in December, slightly slower than a year earlier, as consumer energy prices declined a little and consumer food prices rose only modestly. Core PCE price infla- tion, which excludes changes in consumer food and en- ergy prices, was 1.9 percent over that same period, some- what higher than a year earlier. The consumer price in- dex (CPI) rose 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending in February, while core CPI inflation was 2.1 percent. Re- cent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations—including those from the Michi- gan survey, the Blue Chip Economic Indicators, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on balance. Economic growth in foreign economies slowed further in the fourth quarter. This development reflected slow- ing in the Canadian economy and some emerging market economies (EMEs), including Brazil and Mexico, along with continued economic weakness in the euro area and China. In the advanced foreign economies (AFEs), re- cent data suggested that economic activity, especially in the manufacturing sector, remained subdued in the first quarter of this year. Economic activity also remained weak in many EMEs, particularly in Mexico and emerg- ing Asia excluding China, although some data pointed to Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investor sentiment toward risky assets continued to im- prove over the intermeeting period. Market participants cited accommodative monetary policy communications and optimism for a trade deal between the United States and China as factors that contributed to the improve- ment. Broad equity price indexes increased notably, cor- porate bond spreads narrowed, and measures of equity market volatility declined. Meanwhile, financing condi- tions for businesses and households improved slightly and generally remained supportive of economic activity. FOMC communications issued following the January meeting were generally viewed by market participants as more accommodative than expected. Subsequent com- munications—including the minutes of the January FOMC meeting, the Chair’s semiannual testimony to the Congress, and speeches by FOMC participants—were interpreted as reflecting a patient approach to monetary policy in the near term and a likely conclusion to the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet reduction by the end of this year. The market-implied path for the federal funds rate in 2019 declined slightly over the period, while in- vestors continued to expect no change to the target range for the federal funds rate at the March FOMC meeting. The market-implied path of the federal funds rate for 2020 and 2021 shifted down a little. Yields on nominal Treasury securities declined a bit across the Treasury yield curve over the intermeeting pe- riod. Communications from FOMC participants that were more accommodative than expected amid muted readings on inflation, communications from other major central banks that, on balance, were also regarded as more accommodative than expected, and generally mixed economic data releases reportedly contributed to the decrease in yields and outweighed improved risk sen- timent. The spread between the yields on nominal 10- and 2-year Treasury securities was little changed over the period and remained in the lower end of its historical range of recent decades. Measures of inflation compen- sation derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Secu- rities increased modestly, on net, although they remained below levels seen last fall. Major U.S. equity price indexes increased over the inter- meeting period, with broad-based gains across sectors. Improved prospects for a trade deal between the United States and China and accommodative monetary policy were cited as driving factors that outweighed weaker- Page 8 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ than-expected announcements of corporate earnings for the fourth quarter of 2018 and earnings projections for 2019. Consistent with reports about a potential trade deal, stock prices of firms with greater exposure to China generally outperformed the S&P 500 index. Option- implied volatility on the S&P 500 index at the one- month horizon—the VIX—declined and reached its lowest point this year. Spreads on investment- and spec- ulative-grade corporate bonds narrowed, consistent with the gains in equity prices, but were still wider than levels observed last fall. Conditions in short-term funding markets generally re- mained stable over the intermeeting period. The EFFR was consistently equal to the rate of interest on excess reserves, while take-up in the overnight reverse repur- chase agreement facility remained low. Yield spreads on commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit generally narrowed further from their elevated year-end levels, likely reflecting an increase in investor demand for short-term financial assets. Meanwhile, the statutory federal government debt ceiling was reestablished at $22 trillion on March 1. The prices of foreign risky assets broadly tracked the positive moves in similar U.S. assets over the intermeet- ing period. Communications by major central banks, which were, on net, more accommodative than ex- pected, along with optimism regarding trade negotia- tions between the United States and China, contributed to the upward price moves and more than offset the ef- fects of continued concerns about foreign economic growth. In particular, global equity prices generally ended the period higher, and dedicated emerging market funds continued to see inflows. At the same time, long- term AFE yields declined somewhat, on net, on commu- nications from major foreign central banks and inves- tors’ concerns about foreign economic growth. The broad dollar index appreciated slightly as the exten- sion of accommodative policies and revised guidance by major foreign central banks weighed on AFE currencies. An exception was the British pound, which strengthened a bit against the dollar, as market participants viewed re- cent Parliamentary votes as reducing the likelihood of a no-deal Brexit. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses contin- ued to be accommodative overall. Gross issuance of both investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds was strong in January and February, recovering from the low levels observed late last year. Issuance in the insti- tutional syndicated leveraged loan market also recovered in the first two months of the year, as new issuance in February was in line with average monthly new issuance in 2018, and spreads narrowed somewhat from their De- cember levels. The credit quality of nonfinancial corpo- rations continued to show signs of deterioration, al- though actual defaults remained low overall. Commer- cial and industrial lending showed continued strength in January and February. Small business credit market con- ditions were little changed, and credit conditions in mu- nicipal bond markets stayed accommodative on net. Private-sector analysts revised down their projections for 2019 and year-ahead corporate earnings a bit. The pace of gross equity issuance was sluggish in January but ticked up in February, consistent with the uptick in the stock market. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions continued to be generally accommodative. Commercial mortgage-backed (CMBS) spreads declined over the intermeeting period, with triple-B spreads moving down to near their late- November levels. Issuance of non-agency CMBS re- mained strong through February, and CRE lending by banks grew at a strong pace in February following rela- tively sluggish growth in January. securities Residential mortgage financing conditions remained ac- commodative on balance. Purchase mortgage origina- tion activity was flat in December but edged up in Janu- ary, as mortgage rates remained lower than the peak reached last November. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets were little changed in recent months and remained generally supportive of household spending. Credit card loan growth remained strong through December, though the pace slowed during 2018 amid tighter lending standards by commercial banks. Auto loan growth remained steady through the end of 2018. Staff Economic Outlook The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the March FOMC meeting was revised down a little on balance. This revision reflected the effects of weaker- than-expected incoming data on both aggregate domes- tic spending and foreign economic growth that were only partially offset by a somewhat higher projected path for domestic equity prices and a lower projected trajec- tory for interest rates. The staff forecast that U.S. real GDP growth would slow markedly in the first quarter, reflecting a softening in growth of both consumer spending and business investment. But the staff judged that the first-quarter slowdown would be transitory and that real GDP growth would bounce back solidly in the Page 9 Minutes of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ second quarter. In the medium-term projection, real GDP growth was forecast to run at a rate similar to the staff’s estimate of potential output growth in 2019 and 2020—a somewhat lower trajectory, on net, for real GDP than in the previous projection—and then slow to a pace below potential output growth in 2021. The staff revised up slightly its assumed underlying trend in the labor force participation rate, raising the level of poten- tial output a bit, which contributed—along with the lower projected path for real GDP—to an assessment that resource utilization was a little less tight than in the previous forecast. The unemployment rate was pro- jected to decline a little further below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate but to bottom out by the end of this year and begin to edge up in 2021. With labor market conditions judged to still be tight, the staff con- tinued to assume that projected employment gains would manifest in smaller-than-usual downward pres- sure on the unemployment rate and in larger-than-usual upward pressure on the labor force participation rate. The staff’s forecast for inflation was revised down slightly for the March FOMC meeting, reflecting some recent softer-than-expected readings on consumer prices. Core PCE price inflation was expected to remain at 1.9 percent over this year as a whole and then to edge up to 2 percent for the remainder of the medium term. Total PCE price inflation was forecast to run a bit below core inflation over the next three years, reflecting pro- jected declines in energy prices. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as generally similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff also saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as roughly balanced. On the upside, household spending and busi- ness investment could expand faster than the staff pro- jected, supported by the tax cuts enacted at the end of 2017, still strong overall labor market conditions, and upbeat consumer sentiment. In addition, financial con- ditions might not tighten as much as assumed in the staff forecast. On the downside, the recent softening in a number of economic indicators could be the harbinger of a substantial deterioration in economic activity. Moreover, trade policies and foreign economic develop- ments could move in directions that have significant negative effects on U.S. economic growth. Risks to the inflation projection also were seen as balanced. The up- side risk that inflation could increase more than expected in an economy that is still projected to be operating no- tably above potential for an extended period was coun- terbalanced by the downside risk that longer-term infla- tion expectations may be lower than was assumed in the staff forecast, as well as the possibility that the dollar could appreciate if foreign economic conditions deterio- rated. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2019 through 2021 and over the longer run, based on their individual assess- ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each partici- pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- priate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. These projections and policy assessments are described in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which is an addendum to these minutes. Participants agreed that information received since the January meeting indicated that the labor market had re- mained strong but that growth of economic activity had slowed from its solid rate in the fourth quarter. Payroll employment was little changed in February, but job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Recent indi- cators pointed to slower growth of household spending and business fixed investment in the first quarter. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation had declined, largely as a result of lower energy prices; inflation for items other than food and energy remained near 2 percent. On bal- ance, market-based measures of inflation compensation had remained low in recent months, and survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were lit- tle changed. Participants continued to view a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective as the most likely outcomes over the next few years. Underlying economic fundamentals continued to support sustained expansion, and most participants in- dicated that they did not expect the recent weakness in spending to persist beyond the first quarter. Neverthe- less, participants generally expected the growth rate of real GDP this year to step down from the pace seen over 2018 to a rate at or modestly above their estimates of longer-run growth. Participants cited various factors as Page 10 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ likely to contribute to the step-down, including slower foreign growth and waning effects of fiscal stimulus. A number of participants judged that economic growth in the remaining quarters of 2019 and in the subsequent couple of years would likely be a little lower, on balance, than they had previously forecast. Reasons cited for these downward revisions included disappointing news on global growth and less of a boost from fiscal policy than had previously been anticipated. In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that softness in consumer spending had contrib- uted importantly to the projected slowing in economic growth in the current quarter. Many participants pointed to the weakness in retail sales in December as notable, although they recognized that the data for Jan- uary had shown a partial recovery in retail sales. Partici- pants also observed that much of the recent softness likely reflected temporary factors, such as the partial fed- eral government shutdown and December’s volatility in financial markets, and that consumer sentiment had re- covered after these factors had receded. Consequently, many participants expected consumer spending to pro- ceed at a stronger pace in coming months, supported by favorable underlying factors, including a strong labor market, solid growth in household incomes, improve- ments in financial conditions and in households’ balance sheet positions, and upbeat consumer sentiment. Par- ticipants noted, however, that the continued softness in the housing sector was a concern. Participants also commented on the apparent slowing of growth in business fixed investment in the first quarter. Factors cited as consistent with the recent softness in in- vestment growth included downward revisions in fore- casts of corporate earnings; relatively low energy prices that provided less incentive for new drilling and explo- ration; flattening capital goods orders; reports from con- tacts of softer export sales and of weaker economic ac- tivity abroad; elevated levels of uncertainty about gov- ernment policies, including trade policies; and the likely effect of recent financial market volatility on business sentiment. However, many participants pointed to signs that the weakness in investment would likely abate. Some contacts in manufacturing and other sectors re- ported that business conditions were favorable, with strong demand for labor, business sentiment had recov- ered from its recent decline, and recent reductions in mortgage interest rates would provide some support for construction activity. Agricultural activity remained weak in various areas of the country, with the weakness in part reflecting adverse effects of trade policy on com- modity prices. Recent widespread severe flooding had also adversely affected the agricultural sector. Participants noted that the latest readings on overall in- flation had been somewhat softer than expected. How- ever, participants observed that these readings largely re- flected the effects of earlier declines in crude oil prices and that core inflation remained near 2 percent. Most participants, while seeing inflation pressures as muted, expected the overall rate of inflation to firm somewhat and to be at or near the Committee’s longer-run objec- tive of 2 percent over the next few years. Many partici- pants indicated that, while inflation had been close to 2 percent last year, it was noteworthy that it had not shown greater signs of firming in response to strong la- bor market conditions and rising nominal wage growth, as well as to the short-term upward pressure on prices arising from tariff increases. Low rates of price increases in sectors of the economy that were not cyclically sensi- tive were cited by a couple of participants as one reason for the recent easing in inflation. A few participants ob- served that the pickup in productivity growth last year was a welcome development helping to bolster potential output and damp inflationary pressures. In their discussion of indicators of inflation expecta- tions, participants noted that market-based measures of inflation compensation had risen modestly over the in- termeeting period, although they remained low. A cou- ple of participants stressed that recent readings on sur- vey measures of inflation expectations were also still at low levels. Several participants suggested that longer- term inflation expectations could be at levels somewhat below those consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective and that this might make it more dif- ficult to achieve that objective on a sustained basis. In their discussion of the labor market, participants cited evidence that conditions remained strong, including the very low unemployment rate, a further increase in the labor force participation rate, a low number of layoffs, near-record levels of job openings and help-wanted postings, and solid job gains, on average, in recent months. Participants observed that, following strong job gains in January, there had been little growth in pay- rolls in February, although a few participants pointed out that the February reading had likely been affected by ad- verse weather conditions. A couple of participants noted that, over the medium term, some easing in pay- roll growth was to be expected as economic growth slowed to its longer-run trend rate. Reports from busi- ness contacts predominantly pointed to continued Page 11 Minutes of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ strong labor demand, with firms offering both higher wages and more nonwage benefits to attract workers. Economy-wide wage growth was seen as being broadly consistent with recent rates of labor productivity growth and with inflation of 2 percent. A few participants cited the combination of muted inflation pressures and ex- panding employment as a possible indication that some slack remained in the labor market. Participants commented on a number of risks associated with their outlook for economic activity. A few partici- pants noted that there remained a high level of uncer- tainty associated with international developments, in- cluding ongoing trade talks and Brexit deliberations, al- though a couple of participants remarked that the risks of adverse outcomes were somewhat lower than in Jan- uary. Other downside risks included the possibility of sizable spillovers from a greater-than-expected eco- nomic slowdown in Europe and China, persistence of the softness in spending, or a sharp falloff in fiscal stim- ulus. A few participants observed that an economic de- terioration in the United States, if it occurred, might be amplified by significant debt service burdens for many firms. Participants also mentioned a number of upside risks regarding the outlook for economic activity, includ- ing outcomes in which various sources of uncertainty were resolved favorably, consumer and business senti- ment rebounded sharply, or the recent strengthening in labor productivity growth signaled a pickup in the un- derlying trend. Upside risks to the outlook for inflation included the possibility that wage pressures could rise unexpectedly and lead to greater-than-expected price in- creases. In their discussion of financial developments, partici- pants observed that a good deal of the tightening over the latter part of last year in financial conditions had since been reversed; Federal Reserve communications since the beginning of this year were seen as an im- portant contributor to the recent improvements in fi- nancial conditions. Participants noted that asset valua- tions had recovered strongly and also discussed the de- cline that had occurred in recent months in yields on longer-term Treasury securities. Several participants ex- pressed concern that the yield curve for Treasury securi- ties was now quite flat and noted that historical evidence suggested that an inverted yield curve could portend economic weakness; however, their discussion also noted that the unusually low level of term premiums in longer-term interest rates made historical relationships a less reliable basis for assessing the implications of the recent behavior of the yield curve. Several participants pointed to the increased debt issuance and higher lever- age of nonfinancial corporations as a development that warranted continued monitoring. In their discussion of monetary policy decisions at the current meeting, participants agreed that it would be ap- propriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. Participants judged that the labor market remained strong, but that information received over the intermeeting period, in- cluding recent readings on household spending and business fixed investment, pointed to slower economic growth in the early part of this year than in the fourth quarter of 2018. Despite these indications of softer first- quarter growth, participants generally expected eco- nomic activity to continue to expand, labor markets to remain strong, and inflation to remain near 2 percent. Participants also noted significant uncertainties sur- rounding their economic outlooks, including those re- lated to global economic and financial developments. In light of these uncertainties as well as continued evidence of muted inflation pressures, participants generally agreed that a patient approach to determining future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate remained appropriate. Several participants observed that the characterization of the Committee’s approach to monetary policy as “patient” would need to be reviewed regularly as the economic outlook and uncertainties sur- rounding the outlook evolve. A couple of participants noted that the “patient” characterization should not be seen as limiting the Committee’s options for making pol- icy adjustments when they are deemed appropriate. With regard to the outlook for monetary policy beyond this meeting, a majority of participants expected that the evolution of the economic outlook and risks to the out- look would likely warrant leaving the target range un- changed for the remainder of the year. Several of these participants noted that the current target range for the federal funds rate was close to their estimates of its longer-run neutral level and foresaw economic growth continuing near its longer-run trend rate over the fore- cast period. Participants continued to emphasize that their decisions about the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate at coming meetings would depend on their ongoing assessments of the economic outlook, as informed by a wide range of data, as well as on how the risks to the outlook evolved. Several participants noted that their views of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate could shift in either direction based on incoming data and other developments. Some partici- pants indicated that if the economy evolved as they cur- rently expected, with economic growth above its longer- Page 12 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ run trend rate, they would likely judge it appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate modestly later this year. Several participants expressed concerns that the public had, at times, misinterpreted the medians of participants’ assessments of the appropriate level for the federal funds rate presented in the SEP as representing the con- sensus view of the Committee or as suggesting that pol- icy was on a preset course. Such misinterpretations could complicate the Committee’s communications re- garding its view of appropriate monetary policy, particu- larly in circumstances when the future course of policy is unusually uncertain. Nonetheless, several participants noted that the policy rate projections in the SEP are a valuable component of the overall information provided about the monetary policy outlook. The Chair noted that he had asked the subcommittee on communications to consider ways to improve the information contained in the SEP and to improve communications regarding the role of the federal funds rate projections in the SEP as part of the policy process. Participants also discussed alternative interpretations of subdued inflation pressures in current economic circum- stances and the associated policy implications. Several participants observed that limited inflationary pressures during a period of historically low unemployment could be a sign that low inflation expectations were exerting downward pressure on inflation relative to the Commit- tee’s 2 percent inflation target; in addition, subdued in- flation pressures could indicate a less tight labor market than suggested by common measures of resource utili- zation. Consistent with these observations, several par- ticipants noted that various indicators of inflation expec- tations had remained at the lower end of their historical range, and a few participants commented that they had recently revised down their estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate consistent with 2 percent inflation. In light of these considerations, some participants noted that the appropriate response of the federal funds rate to signs of labor market tightening could be modest pro- vided that signs of inflation pressures continued to be limited. Some participants regarded their judgments that the federal funds rate was likely to remain on a very flat trajectory as reflecting other factors, such as low esti- mates of the longer-run neutral real interest rate or risk- management considerations. A few participants ob- served that the appropriate path for policy, insofar as it implied lower interest rates for longer periods of time, could lead to greater financial stability risks. However, a couple of these participants noted that such financial sta- bility risks could be addressed through appropriate use of countercyclical macroprudential policy tools or other supervisory or regulatory tools. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that the information received since the Committee met in January indicated that the labor market remained strong but that growth of eco- nomic activity had slowed from its solid rate in the fourth quarter. Payroll employment was little changed in February, but job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had re- mained low. Recent indicators pointed to slower growth of household spending and business fixed investment in the first quarter. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation had declined, largely as a result of lower energy prices; inflation for items other than food and energy remained near 2 percent. On balance, market-based measures of inflation compensation had remained low in recent months, and survey-based measures of longer-term in- flations expectations were little changed. In their consideration of the economic outlook, mem- bers noted that financial conditions had improved since the beginning of year, but that some time would be needed to assess whether indications of weak economic growth in the first quarter would persist in subsequent quarters. Members also noted that inflationary pressures remained muted and that a number of uncertainties bearing on the U.S. and global economic outlook still awaited resolution. However, members continued to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Commit- tee’s symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes for the U.S. economy in the period ahead. In light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, members concurred that the Committee could be patient as it determined what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support those outcomes. After assessing current conditions and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- bers decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. Members agreed that in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Com- mittee would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum- employment and symmetric 2 percent inflation objec- tives. They reiterated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including Page 13 Minutes of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ measures of labor market conditions, indicators of infla- tion pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. More gen- erally, members noted that decisions regarding near- term adjustments of the stance of monetary policy would appropriately remain dependent on the evolution of the outlook as informed by incoming data. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed to characterize the labor market as remaining strong. While payroll employment had been little changed in February, job gains had been solid, on aver- age, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Members also agreed to note that growth in economic activity appeared to have slowed from its solid rate in the fourth quarter, consistent with recent indicators of household spending and business fixed in- vestment. The description of overall inflation was re- vised to recognize that inflation had declined, largely as a result of lower energy prices, while still noting that in- flation for items other than food and energy remained near 2 percent. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective March 21, 2019, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2¼ to 2½ percent, including overnight re- verse repurchase operations (and reverse repur- chase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate week- end, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 2.25 percent, in amounts lim- ited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each cal- endar month that exceeds $30 billion, and to continue reinvesting in agency mortgage- backed securities the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed secu- rities received during each calendar month that exceeds $20 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are ac- ceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January indicates that the labor market remains strong but that growth of economic activity has slowed from its solid rate in the fourth quarter. Payroll employment was little changed in February, but job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Recent indicators point to slower growth of household spending and business fixed invest- ment in the first quarter. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation has declined, largely as a result of lower energy prices; inflation for items other than food and energy remains near 2 percent. On balance, market-based measures of inflation compensation have remained low in recent months, and survey-based measures of longer- term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. The Committee continues to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective as the most likely outcomes. In light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will be patient as it determines what future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized Page 14 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Richard H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Randal K. Quarles, and Eric Rosengren. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un- changed at 2.40 percent and voted unanimously to ap- prove establishment of the primary credit rate at the ex- isting level of 3.00 percent, effective March 21, 2019. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, April 30– May 1, 2019. The meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m. on March 20, 2019. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on February 19, 2019, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 29–30, 2019. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 1 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- tee (FOMC) meeting held on March 19–20, 2019, meet- ing participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2019 to 2021 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—includ- ing a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to af- fect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the ab- sence of further shocks to the economy.1 “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster out- comes for economic activity and inflation that best sat- isfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Participants who submitted longer-run projections gen- erally expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth of real GDP in 2019 would run at or somewhat above their individual estimates of its longer-run rate. Most participants continued to expect real GDP growth to edge down over the projection horizon, with almost all participants projecting growth in 2021 to be at or be- low their estimates of its longer-run rate. All participants who submitted longer-run projections continued to ex- pect that the unemployment rate would run at or below their estimates of its longer-run level through 2021. Al- most all participants projected that inflation, as meas- ured by the four-quarter percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would increase slightly over the next two years, and most participants expected that it would be at or slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2020 and 2021. Compared with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from December 2018, all participants marked down somewhat their projections for real GDP growth in 2019, and most revised down slightly their projections for total inflation in 2019. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. 1 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. As shown in figure 2, most participants expected that the evolution of the economy, relative to their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, would likely warrant keeping the federal funds rate at its current level through the end of 2019. The medians of partici- pants’ assessments of the appropriate level of the federal funds rate in 2020 and 2021 were close to the median assessment of its longer-run level. Compared with the December submissions, the median projections for the federal funds rate for the end of 2019, 2020, and 2021 were 50 basis points lower. A substantial majority of participants continued to view the uncertainty around their projections as broadly sim- ilar to the average of the past 20 years. While a majority of participants viewed the risks to the outlook as bal- anced, a couple more participants than in December viewed the risks to inflation as weighted to the downside. The Outlook for Economic Activity As shown in table 1, the median of participants’ projec- tions for the growth rate of real GDP in 2019, condi- tional on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, was 2.1 percent. Most participants continued to expect GDP growth to slow throughout the projection horizon, with the median projection at 1.9 percent in 2020 and at 1.8 percent in 2021, a touch lower than the median estimate of its longer-run rate of 1.9 percent. Relative to the December SEP, the medians of the projections for real GDP growth in 2019 and 2020 were 0.2 percentage point and 0.1 percentage point lower, respectively. Most participants mentioned a re- cent patch of weaker data on domestic economic activ- ity, and some pointed to a softer global growth outlook, as factors behind the downward revisions to their near- term growth estimates. The median of projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2019 was 3.7 percent, about ½ per- centage point below the median assessment of its longer- run level. The median projections for 2020 and 2021 were 3.8 percent and 3.9 percent, respectively. These median unemployment rates were a little higher than those from the December SEP. Nevertheless, most par- ticipants continued to project that the unemployment rate in 2021 would be below their estimates of its longer- run level. The median estimate of the longer-run rate of Page 2 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ , s t n e d i s e r p k n a B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F d n a s r e b m e m d r a o B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F f o s n o i t c e j o r p c i m o n o c E . 1 e l b a T 9 1 0 2 h c r a M , y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p f o s t n e m s s e s s a l a u d i v i d n i r i e h t r e d n u r e g n o L n u r 3 e g n a R 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 r e g n o L n u r 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 5 . 1 1 . 2 – 4 . 1 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 5 . 1 4 . 2 – 6 . 1 7 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 7 . 1 0 . 2 – 5 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 5 . 2 – 3 . 2 6 . 4 – 0 . 4 6 . 4 – 0 . 4 2 . 4 – 4 . 3 2 . 4 – 4 . 3 1 . 4 – 4 . 3 3 . 4 – 4 . 3 0 . 4 – 5 . 3 0 . 4 – 4 . 3 5 . 4 – 1 . 4 5 . 4 – 2 . 4 1 . 4 – 7 . 3 9 . 3 – 6 . 3 9 . 3 – 6 . 3 8 . 3 – 5 . 3 8 . 3 – 6 . 3 7 . 3 – 5 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 9 . 1 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 3 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 n u r 9 . 1 9 . 1 3 . 4 4 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 2 8 . 1 8 . 1 9 . 3 8 . 3 0 . 2 1 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 9 . 1 0 . 2 8 . 3 6 . 3 0 . 2 1 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 3 . 2 7 . 3 5 . 3 8 . 1 9 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 2 n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D P D G l a e r n i e g n a h C n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n U n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D 4 n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o C h t a p y c i l o p e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r P : o m e M n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P 2 y c n e d n e t l a r t n e C 1 n a i d e M 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 r e g n o L 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 e l b a i r a V t n e c r e P 5 . 3 – 5 . 2 5 . 3 – 5 . 2 6 . 3 – 4 . 2 6 . 3 – 4 . 2 4 . 3 – 4 . 2 6 . 3 – 4 . 2 9 . 2 – 4 . 2 1 . 3 – 4 . 2 0 . 3 – 5 . 2 0 . 3 – 5 . 2 9 . 2 – 4 . 2 1 . 3 – 6 . 2 9 . 2 – 4 . 2 4 . 3 – 9 . 2 6 . 2 – 4 . 2 1 . 3 – 6 . 2 8 . 2 8 . 2 6 . 2 1 . 3 6 . 2 1 . 3 4 . 2 9 . 2 n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e F e h t m o r f s e g n a h c t n e c r e p e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i f o s e r u s a e m h t o b r o f s n o i t c e j o r p d n a ) P D G ( t c u d o r p c i t s e m o d s s o r g l a e r n i e g n a h c f o s n o i t c e j o r P : e t o N e g n a h c f o s e t a r e g a t n e c r e p e h t e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c d n a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t o t r a e y s u o i v e r p e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f r o f s n o i t c e j o r P . y g r e n e d n a d o o f g n i d u l c x e E C P r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t d n a ) E C P ( s e r u t i d n e p x e n o i t p m u s n o c l a n o s r e p r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t , y l e v i t c e p s e r , n i e r a s n o i t c e j o r p s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a E . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t n i e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u n a i l i v i c e g a r e v a e h t r o f e r a e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t h c a e h c i h w o t e t a r e h t f o t n e m s s e s s a s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a e t n e s e r p e r s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a f o t n e m s s e s s a r e h r o s i h n o d e s a b e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p e h T . y m o n o c e e h t o t s k c o h s r e h t r u f f o e c n e s b a e h t n i d n a y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a r e d n u e g r e v n o c o t d e t c e p x e e b d l u o w e l b a i r a v t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t r o e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f e g n a r t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t f o t n i o p d i m e h t f o e u l a v e h t e r a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e d a m e r e w s n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e c e D e h T . n u r r e g n o l e h t r e v o r o r a e y r a d n e l a c d e ﬁ i c e p s e h t f o d n e e h t t a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f l e v e l n i e g n a h c e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o l t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n O . 8 1 0 2 , 9 1 – 8 1 r e b m e c e D n o e e t t i m m o C t e k r a M n e p O l a r e d e F e h t f o g n i t e e m e h t t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n o d n a , g n i t e e m , 8 1 0 2 , 9 1 – 8 1 r e b m e c e D e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o , e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t , P D G l a e r . g n i t e e m , 9 1 0 2 , 0 2 – 9 1 h c r a M e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i s n o i t c e j o r p h c u s s n o i t c e j o r p f o r e b m u n e h t n e h W . t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f d e g n a r r a e r a s n o i t c e j o r p e h t n e h w n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , d o i r e p h c a e r o F . 1 . r a e y t a h t n i e l b a i r a v t a h t r o f , t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f , s n o i t c e j o r p ’ s t n a p i c i t r a p l l a s e d u l c n i r a e y n e v i g a n i e l b a i r a v a r o f e g n a r . r a e y h c a e n i e l b a i r a v h c a e r o f s n o i t c e j o r p t s e w o l e e r h t d n a t s e h g i h e e r h t e h t s e d u l c x e y c n e d n e t l a r t n e c e h T e h T . d e t c e l l o c t o n e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . 2 . 3 . 4 . s n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m o w t e h t f o e g a r e v a e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , n e v e s i Page 3 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2019–21 and over the longer run Percent Change in real GDP Median of projections Central tendency of projections Range of projections Actual 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Percent Unemployment rate 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Percent PCE inflation 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Percent Core PCE inflation 3 2 1 7 6 5 4 3 3 2 1 3 2 1 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Page 4 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate Percent 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par- ticipant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Page 5 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ unemployment was 4.3 percent, which was slightly lower than in December. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- ployment rate from 2019 to 2021 and in the longer run. The distribution of individual projections for real GDP growth for 2019 shifted down relative to that in the De- cember SEP, while the distributions for 2020, 2021, and the longer-run rate of GDP growth changed only slightly. The distributions of individual projections for the unemployment rate in 2019 and 2020 moved mod- estly higher relative to those in December, and the dis- tribution in 2021 edged higher as well. Meanwhile, the distribution for the longer-run unemployment rate shifted down a touch. The Outlook for Inflation As shown in table 1, the medians of projections for total PCE price inflation were 1.8 percent in 2019 and 2.0 percent in both 2020 and 2021, each a touch lower than in the December SEP. The medians of projections for core PCE price inflation over the 2019–21 period were 2.0 percent, the same as in December. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri- butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in- flation. The distributions of projections for total PCE price inflation and core PCE price inflation in 2019, 2020, and 2021 shifted down slightly from the Decem- ber SEP. Almost all participants expected that total and core PCE price inflation would be between 1.8 and 2.2 percent throughout the projection horizon. Appropriate Monetary Policy Figure 3.E shows distributions of participants’ judg- ments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2019 to 2021 and over the longer run. The distributions for 2019 through 2021 shifted toward lower values. Compared with the projections prepared for the December SEP, the median federal funds rate was 50 basis points lower each year over the 2019–21 period. At the end of 2019, the median of federal funds rate projections was 2.38 percent, consistent with no rate increases over the course of 2019. Thereafter, the medi- ans of the projections were 2.63 percent at the end of both 2020 and 2021, slightly lower than the median of the longer-run projections of the federal funds rate of 2.75 percent. Muted inflationary pressures and risk- management considerations were both cited as factors contributing to the downward revisions in participants’ assessments of the appropriate path for the policy rate. The distribution of individual projections for the longer- run federal funds rate ticked down from December. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Variable Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . Total consumer prices2 . . . . . 2019 ±1.4 ±0.5 ±0.9 Short-term interest rates3 . . . . ±0.9 2020 ±1.9 ±1.3 ±1.0 ±2.0 2021 ±1.9 ±1.7 ±1.1 ±2.5 NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1999 through 2018 that were re- leased in the spring by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using His- torical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx. doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. Uncertainty and Risks In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast errors of various private and government forecasts over the past 20 years—for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are represented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts display the SEP medians for the three variables sur- rounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the de- gree of uncertainty attending these projections is similar to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 percent probability of being within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of uncer- tainty is substantial and generally increases as the fore- cast horizon lengthens. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- rounding their individual economic projections are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. A substantial majority of participants continued to Page 6 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2019–21 and over the longer run 2019 March projections December projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 1.2 1.3 - 1.4 1.5 - 1.6 1.7 - 1.8 1.9 - 2.0 2.1 Percent range - 2.2 2.3 - 2.4 2.5 - 2.6 2.7 Number of participants - 1.2 1.3 - 1.4 1.5 - 1.6 1.7 - 1.8 1.9 - 2.0 2.1 Percent range - 2.2 2.3 - 2.4 2.5 - 2.6 2.7 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2020 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 1.2 1.3 - 1.4 1.5 - 1.6 1.7 - 1.8 1.9 - 2.0 2.1 Percent range - 2.2 2.3 - 2.4 2.5 - 2.6 2.7 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 1.2 1.3 - 1.4 1.5 - 1.6 1.7 - 1.8 1.9 - 2.0 2.1 Percent range - 2.2 2.3 - 2.4 2.5 - 2.6 2.7 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 7 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2019–21 and over the longer run 2019 March projections December projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 3.0 3.1 - 3.2 3.3 - 3.4 3.5 - 3.6 3.7 - 3.8 3.9 - 4.0 4.1 Percent range - 4.2 4.3 - 4.4 4.5 - 4.6 4.7 - 4.8 4.9 - 5.0 5.1 Number of participants - 3.0 3.1 - 3.2 3.3 - 3.4 3.5 - 3.6 3.7 - 3.8 3.9 - 4.0 4.1 Percent range - 4.2 4.3 - 4.4 4.5 - 4.6 4.7 - 4.8 4.9 - 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2020 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 3.0 3.1 - 3.2 3.3 - 3.4 3.5 - 3.6 3.7 - 3.8 3.9 - 4.0 4.1 Percent range - 4.2 4.3 - 4.4 4.5 - 4.6 4.7 - 4.8 4.9 - 5.0 5.1 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 3.0 3.1 - 3.2 3.3 - 3.4 3.5 - 3.6 3.7 - 3.8 3.9 - 4.0 4.1 Percent range - 4.2 4.3 - 4.4 4.5 - 4.6 4.7 - 4.8 4.9 - 5.0 5.1 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 8 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2019–21 and over the longer run 2019 March projections December projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 1.5 1.6 - 1.7 1.8 - 1.9 2.0 Percent range - 2.1 2.2 - 2.3 2.4 Number of participants - 1.5 1.6 - 1.7 1.8 - 1.9 2.0 Percent range - 2.1 2.2 - 2.3 2.4 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 1.5 1.6 - 1.7 1.8 - 1.9 2.0 Percent range - 2.1 2.2 - 2.3 2.4 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2020 2021 Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 1.5 1.6 - 1.7 1.8 - 1.9 2.0 Percent range - 2.1 2.2 - 2.3 2.4 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 9 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂation, 2019–21 2019 March projections December projections 2020 2021 - 1.7 1.8 - 1.7 1.8 - 1.7 1.8 - 1.9 2.0 - 2.1 2.2 Percent range - 1.9 2.0 - 2.1 2.2 Percent range - 1.9 2.0 - 2.1 2.2 Percent range Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 2.3 2.4 - 2.3 2.4 - 2.3 2.4 Page 10 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2019–21 and over the longer run 2019 March projections December projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 1.88 2.12 - 2.13 2.37 - 2.38 2.62 - 2.63 2.87 - 2.88 3.12 - 3.13 3.37 - 3.38 3.62 Percent range - 3.63 3.87 - 3.88 4.12 - 4.13 4.37 - 4.38 4.62 - 4.63 4.87 - 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 1.88 2.12 - 2.13 2.37 - 2.38 2.62 - 2.63 2.87 - 2.88 3.12 - 3.13 3.37 - 3.38 3.62 Percent range - 3.63 3.87 - 3.88 4.12 - 4.13 4.37 - 4.38 4.62 - 4.63 4.87 - 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 1.88 2.12 - 2.13 2.37 - 2.38 2.62 - 2.63 2.87 - 2.88 3.12 - 3.13 3.37 - 3.38 3.62 Percent range - 3.63 3.87 - 3.88 4.12 - 4.13 4.37 - 4.38 4.62 - 4.63 4.87 - 4.88 5.12 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 - 1.88 2.12 - 2.13 2.37 - 2.38 2.62 - 2.63 2.87 - 2.88 3.12 - 3.13 3.37 - 3.38 3.62 Percent range - 3.63 3.87 - 3.88 4.12 - 4.13 4.37 - 4.38 4.62 - 4.63 4.87 - 4.88 5.12 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 11 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ view the degree of uncertainty attached to their eco- nomic projections for real GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years.2 Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric around the median projections, they do not reflect any asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess- ments of the balance of risks to their current economic projections are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig- ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. A majority of participants judged the risks to the outlook for real GDP growth, the unem- ployment rate, total inflation, and core inflation as broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly consistent with a symmetric fan chart. The balance of risks to the projection for real GDP growth shifted a bit lower, with four participants assessing the risks as weighted to the downside and no participant seeing it weighted to the upside. The balance of risks to the projection for the unemployment rate moved a touch higher, with three participants judging the risks to the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside and two participants viewing the risks as weighted to the downside. In addition, the balance of risks to the inflation projections shifted down slightly relative to December. Two more participants than in December saw the risks to the inflation projec- tions as weighted to the downside, and no participant judged the risks as weighted to the upside. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, trade tensions as well as develop- ments abroad were mentioned by participants as sources of uncertainty or downside risk to the economic growth outlook. For the inflation outlook, the effect of trade restrictions was cited as an upside risk, while the concern that inflation expectations could be drifting below the FOMC’s objective and the potential for a stronger dollar and weaker domestic demand to put downward pressure on inflation were viewed as downside risks. A number of participants mentioned that their assessments of risks remained roughly balanced in part as a result of their downward revisions to the appropriate federal funds rate path. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the federal funds rate in response to actual and prospective devel- opments over time in key economic variables such as real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation, uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the fed- eral funds rate importantly reflects the uncertainties about the paths for these economic variables along with other factors. Figure 5 provides a graphical representa- tion of this uncertainty, plotting the SEP median for the federal funds rate surrounded by confidence intervals derived from the results presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial and increases for longer horizons. 2 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici- pants’ projections. Page 12 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.A. Uncertainty and risks in projections of GDP growth Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Change in real GDP Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 4 3 2 1 0 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about GDP growth March projections December projections Risks to GDP growth March projections December projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 13 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.B. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the unemployment rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Unemployment rate Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate March projections December projections March projections December projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 14 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.C. Uncertainty and risks in projections of PCE inﬂation Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors PCE inflation Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 3 2 1 0 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about PCE inflation March projections December projections Risks to PCE inflation March projections December projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about core PCE inflation March projections December projections Risks to core PCE inflation March projections December projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 15 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of March 19–20, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 5. Uncertainty in projections of the federal funds rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Federal funds rate Midpoint of target range Median of projections 70% confidence interval* Actual 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Percent 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com- mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The conﬁdence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to oﬀset the eﬀects of shocks to the economy. The conﬁdence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero—the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The conﬁdence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent conﬁdence interval if the conﬁdence interval has been truncated at zero. Page 16 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- tial costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.6 to 4.4 percent in the current year and 1.1 to 4.9 percent in the second and third years. The corre- sponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall infla- tion would be 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confi- dence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and cen- tered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. How- ever, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate can- not be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the down- side, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig- ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par- ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summa- rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone- tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac- tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri- ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee April 30–May 1, 2019 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 30, 2019, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, May 1, 2019, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Richard H. Clarida Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Randal K. Quarles Eric Rosengren Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Trevor A. Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chair, Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, Anna Paulson, Geoffrey Tootell, William Wascher, Jonathan L. Willis, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian M. Doyle,3 Wendy E. Dunn, Ellen E. Meade, and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed and Christopher J. Erceg,4 Senior Associate Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; William F. Bassett, Senior Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Joshua Gallin and David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. 3 Attended Wednesday session only. 4 Attended opening remarks for Tuesday session only. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Marnie Gillis DeBoer, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; John J. Stevens, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Eric C. Engstrom, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, and Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Glenn Follette, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Laura Lipscomb2 and Zeynep Senyuz,2 Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Dana L. Burnett, Michele Cavallo, and Matthew Malloy,2 Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,5 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Juan M. Londono, Principal Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Camelia Minoiu and Bernd Schlusche, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Brian J. Bonis,2 Lead Financial Institution and Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors James M. Trevino,2 Senior Technology Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ron Feldman, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 5 Attended Tuesday session only. Kartik B. Athreya, Michael Dotsey, Sylvain Leduc, and Ellis W. Tallman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and Cleveland, respectively Evan F. Koenig, Antoine Martin,2 Samuel Schulhofer- Wohl, Mark L.J. Wright, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,2 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, New York, Chicago, Minneapolis, and New York, respectively David C. Wheelock, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Patricia Zobel,2 Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Mary Amiti and William E. Riordan,2 Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and New York, respectively John Robertson, Research Economist and Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Justin Meyer,2 Markets Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Selection of Committee Officer By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Anna Paulson to serve as Associate Economist, effective April 30, 2019, until the selection of her successor at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2020. Balance Sheet Normalization Participants resumed their discussion of issues related to balance sheet normalization with a focus on the long- run maturity composition of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio. The staff presented two il- lustrative scenarios as a way of highlighting a range of implications of different long-run target portfolio com- positions. In the first scenario, the maturity composition of the U.S. Treasury securities in the target portfolio was similar to that of the universe of currently outstanding U.S. Treasury securities (a “proportional” portfolio). In the second, the target portfolio contained only shorter- term securities with maturities of three years or less (a “shorter maturity” portfolio). The staff provided esti- mates of the capacity that the Committee would have under each scenario to provide economic stimulus through a maturity extension program (MEP). The staff Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ also provided estimates of the extent to which term pre- miums embedded in longer-term Treasury yields might be affected under the two different scenarios. Based on the staff’s standard modeling framework, all else equal, a move to the illustrative shorter maturity portfolio would put significant upward pressure on term premiums and imply that the path of the federal funds rate would need to be correspondingly lower to achieve the same macro- economic outcomes as in the baseline outlook. How- ever, the staff noted the uncertainties inherent in the analysis, including the difficulties in estimating the ef- fects of changes in SOMA holdings on longer-term in- terest rates and the economy more generally. The staff presentation also considered illustrative grad- ual and accelerated transition paths to each long-run tar- get portfolio. Under the illustrative “gradual” transition, reinvestments of maturing Treasury holdings, principal payments on agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and purchases to accommodate growth in Federal Re- serve liabilities would be directed to Treasury securities with maturities in the long-run target portfolio. Under the illustrative “accelerated” transition, the reinvestment of principal payments on agency MBS and purchases to accommodate growth in Federal Reserve liabilities would be directed to Treasury bills until the weighted average maturity (WAM) of the SOMA portfolio reached the WAM associated with the target portfolio. Depending on the combination of long-run target com- position and the transition plan for arriving at that com- position, the staff reported that, in the illustrative sce- narios, it could take from 5 years to more than 15 years for the WAM of the SOMA portfolio to reach its long- run level. In its Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implemen- tation and Balance Sheet Normalization, the Committee noted that it is prepared to adjust the size and composi- tion of the balance sheet to achieve its macroeconomic objectives in a scenario in which the federal funds rate is constrained by the effective lower bound. Against this backdrop, participants discussed the benefits and costs of alternative long-run target portfolio compositions in supporting the use of balance sheet policies in such sce- narios. In their discussion of a shorter maturity portfolio, many participants noted the advantage of increased capacity for the Federal Reserve to conduct an MEP, which could be helpful in providing policy accommodation in a fu- ture economic downturn given the secular decline in neutral real interest rates and the associated reduced scope for lowering the federal funds rate in response to negative economic shocks. Several participants viewed an MEP as a useful initial option to address a future downturn in which the Committee judged that it needed to employ balance sheet actions to provide appropriate policy accommodation. Participants acknowledged the staff analysis suggesting that creating space to conduct an MEP by moving to a shorter maturity portfolio com- position could boost term premiums and result in a lower path for the federal funds rate, reducing the capac- ity to ease financial conditions with adjustments in short- term rates. A number of participants noted, however, that the estimates of the effect of a move to a shorter- maturity portfolio composition on the long-run neutral federal funds rate are subject to substantial uncertainty and are based on a number of strong modeling assump- tions. For example, estimates of term premium effects based on experience during the crisis could overstate the effects that would be associated with a gradual evolution of the composition of the SOMA portfolio. In addition, a shift in the composition of the SOMA portfolio could result in changes in the supply of securities that would tend to offset upward pressure on term premiums. Nonetheless, other participants expressed concern about the potential that a shorter maturity portfolio composition could result in a lower long-run neutral fed- eral funds rate. Moreover, while a shorter maturity port- folio would provide substantial capacity to conduct an MEP, some participants raised questions about the ef- fectiveness of MEPs as a policy tool relative to that of the federal funds rate or other unconventional policy tools. These participants noted that, in a situation in which it would be appropriate to employ unconven- tional policy tools, they likely would prefer to employ forward guidance or large-scale purchases of assets ahead of an MEP. In the view of these participants, the potential benefit of transitioning to a shorter maturity SOMA composition in terms of increased ability to con- duct an MEP might not be worth the potential costs. In their discussion of a proportional portfolio composi- tion, participants observed that moving to this target SOMA composition would not be expected to have much effect on current staff estimates of term premiums and thus would likely not reduce the scope for lowering the target range for the federal funds rate target in re- sponse to adverse economic shocks. As a result, several participants judged the proportional target composition to be well aligned with the Committee’s previous state- ments that changes in the target range for the federal funds rate are the primary means by which the Commit- tee adjusts the stance of monetary policy. In addition, several participants noted that while the staff analysis _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 30–May 1, 2019Page 3 suggested a proportional portfolio would not contain as much capacity to conduct an MEP as a shorter maturity portfolio, it still would contain meaningful capacity along these lines. Some participants noted that a pro- portional portfolio would also help maintain the tradi- tional separation between the Federal Reserve’s deci- sions regarding the composition of the SOMA portfolio and the maturity composition of Treasury debt held by the private sector. However, a number of participants judged that it would be desirable to structure the SOMA portfolio in a way that would provide more capacity to conduct an MEP than in the proportional portfolio. In addition, a couple of participants noted that a shorter maturity portfolio would maintain a narrow gap between the average maturity of the assets in the SOMA portfolio and the short average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s primary liabilities. Participants also discussed the financial stability implica- tions that could be associated with alternative long-run target portfolio compositions. A couple of participants noted that a proportional portfolio could imply a rela- tively flat yield curve, which could result in greater in- centives for “reach for yield” behavior in the financial system. That said, a few participants noted that a shorter maturity portfolio could affect financial stability risks by increasing the incentives for the private sector to issue short-term debt. A couple of participants judged that financial market functioning might be adversely affected if the holdings in the shorter maturity portfolio ac- counted for too large a share of total shorter maturity Treasury securities outstanding. In discussing the transition to the desired long-run SOMA portfolio composition, several participants noted that a gradual pace of transition could help avoid un- wanted effects on financial conditions. However, par- ticipants observed that the gradual transition paths de- scribed in the staff presentation would take many years to complete. Against this backdrop, a few participants discussed the possibility of following some type of ac- celerated transition, perhaps including sales of the SOMA’s residual holdings of agency MBS. In addition, several participants suggested that the Committee could communicate its plans about the SOMA portfolio com- position in terms of a desired change over an intermedi- ate horizon rather than a specific long-run target. Several participants expressed the view that a decision regarding the long-run composition of the portfolio would not need to be made for some time, and a couple of participants highlighted the importance of making such a decision in the context of the ongoing review of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategies, tools, and communications practices. Some participants noted the importance of developing an effective communica- tion plan to describe the Committee’s decisions regard- ing the long-run target composition for the SOMA port- folio and the transition to that target composition. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager of the SOMA reviewed developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. In the United States, prices for equities and other risk assets re- portedly were buoyed by perceptions of an accommoda- tive stance of monetary policy, incoming economic data pointing to continued solid economic expansion, and some signs of receding downside risks to the global out- look. Treasury yields declined over the period, adding to their substantial drop since September, and the expected path of the federal funds rate as implied by futures prices shifted down as well. Market participants attributed these moves in part to FOMC communications indicat- ing that the Committee would continue to be patient in evaluating the need for any further adjustments of the target range for the federal funds rate. Softer incoming data on inflation may also have contributed to the down- ward revision in the expected path of policy. Nearly all respondents on the Open Market Desk’s latest surveys of primary dealers and market participants anticipated that the federal funds target range would be unchanged for the remainder of the year. In reviewing global devel- opments, the manager noted that market prices appeared to reflect perceptions of improved economic prospects in China. However, investors reportedly remained con- cerned about the economic outlook for Europe and the United Kingdom. The manager also reported on developments related to open market operations. In light of the declines in inter- est rates since November last year, principal payments on the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency MBS were projected to exceed the $20 billion redemption cap by a modest amount sometime this summer. As directed by the Committee, any principal payments received on agency MBS in excess of the cap would be reinvested in agency MBS. The Desk planned to conduct any such operations by purchasing uniform MBS rather than Fan- nie Mae and Freddie Mac securities. Consistent with the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans re- leased following the March meeting, reinvestments of maturing Treasury securities beginning on May 2 would be based on a cap on monthly Treasury redemptions of Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ $15 billion—down from the $30 billion monthly re- demption cap that had been in place since October of last year. The deputy manager reviewed developments in domes- tic money markets. Reserve balances declined by $150 billion over the intermeeting period and reached a low point of just below $1.5 trillion on April 23. The decline in reserves stemmed from a reduction in the SOMA’s agency MBS and Treasury holdings of $46 bil- lion, reducing the SOMA portfolio to $3.92 trillion, and from a shift in the composition of liabilities, predomi- nantly related to the increase in the Treasury General Ac- count (TGA). The TGA was volatile during the intermeeting period. In early April, the Treasury reduced bill issuance and al- lowed the TGA balance to fall in anticipation of individ- ual tax receipts. As tax receipts arrived after the tax date, the TGA rose to more than $400 billion, resulting in a sharp decline in reserves over the last two weeks of April. Against this backdrop, the distribution of rates on traded volumes in overnight unsecured markets shifted higher. The effective federal funds rate (EFFR) moved up to 2.45 percent by the end of the intermeeting period, 5 ba- sis points above the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate. Several factors appeared to spur this upward pressure. Tax-related runoffs in deposits at banks reportedly led banks to increase short-term borrowing, particularly through Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) advances and in the federal funds market. Although some banks continued to hold large quantities of reserves, other banks were operating with reserve balances closer to their lowest comfortable levels as reported in the most recent Senior Financial Officer Survey. This distribution of reserves may have contributed to somewhat more sus- tained upward pressure on the federal funds rate than had been experienced in recent years around tax-pay- ment dates. In addition, rates on Treasury repurchase agreements (repo), were, in part, pushed higher by tax- related outflows from government-only money market mutual funds and a corresponding decline in repo lend- ing by those funds. Elevated repo rates contributed to upward pressure on the federal funds rate, as FHLBs re- portedly shifted some of their liquidity investments out of federal funds and into the repo market. In addition, some market participants pointed to heightened demand for federal funds at month end by some banks in con- nection with their efforts to meet liquidity coverage ratio requirements as contributing to upward pressure on the federal funds rate. The deputy manager also discussed a staff proposal in which the Board would implement a 5 basis point tech- nical adjustment to the Interest on Required Reserves (IORR) and IOER rates. The proposed action would bring these rates to 15 basis points below the top of the target range for the federal funds rate and 10 basis points above the bottom of the range and the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) offer rate. As with the previous technical adjustments in June and December 2018, the proposed adjustment was intended to foster trading in the federal funds market well within the target range established by the FOMC. A technical adjustment would reduce the spread between the IOER rate and the ON RRP offering rate to 10 basis points, the smallest since the introduction of the ON RRP facility. The staff judged that the narrower spread did not pose a significant risk of increased take-up at the ON RRP facility because repo rates had been trading well above the ON RRP offer rate for some time. How- ever, if it became appropriate in the future to further lower the IOER rate, the staff noted that the Committee might wish to first consider where to set the ON RRP offer rate relative to the target range for the federal funds rate to mitigate this risk. The manager concluded the briefing on financial market developments and open market operations with a review of the role of standing swap lines in supporting financial stability. He recommended that the Committee vote to renew these swap lines at this meeting following the usual annual schedule. The Committee voted unanimously to renew the recip- rocal currency arrangements with the Bank of Canada and the Bank of Mexico; these arrangements are associ- ated with the Federal Reserve’s participation in the North American Framework Agreement of 1994. In ad- dition, the Committee voted unanimously to renew the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss Na- tional Bank. The votes to renew the Federal Reserve’s participation in these standing arrangements occur an- nually at the April or May FOMC meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 30–May 1, 2019Page 5 Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available for the April 30–May 1 meet- ing indicated that labor market conditions remained strong and that real gross domestic product (GDP) in- creased at a solid rate in the first quarter even as house- hold spending and business fixed investment rose more slowly in the first quarter than in the fourth quarter of last year. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for per- sonal consumption expenditures (PCE), declined, on net, in recent months and was somewhat below 2 per- cent in March. Survey-based measures of longer-run in- flation expectations were little changed. Total nonfarm payroll employment recorded a strong gain in March, and the unemployment rate held steady at 3.8 percent. The labor force participation rate de- clined a little in March after having risen, on balance, in the previous few months, and the employment-to-pop- ulation ratio edged down. The unemployment rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics in March were at or below their levels at the end of the previous economic expansion, though persistent differentials in unemployment rates across groups remained. The share of workers employed part time for economic reasons edged up in March but was still below the lows reached in late 2007. The rate of private-sector job openings in February declined slightly from the elevated level that prevailed for much of the past year, while the rate of quits was unchanged at a high level; the four-week mov- ing average of initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits through mid-April was near historically low lev- els. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 3.2 percent over the 12 months ending in March, a somewhat faster pace than a year earlier. The employ- ment cost index for private-sector workers increased 2.8 percent over the 12 months ending in March, the same as a year earlier. Industrial production edged down in March and for the first quarter overall. Manufacturing output declined moderately in the first quarter, primarily reflecting a de- crease in the output of motor vehicles and parts; outside of motor vehicles and parts, manufacturing production was little changed. Mining output declined, on net, over the three months ending in March. Automakers’ assem- bly schedules suggested that the production of light mo- tor vehicles would move up in the near term, and new orders indexes from national and regional manufactur- ing surveys pointed to modest gains in overall factory output in the coming months. However, industry news indicated that aircraft production would slow in the sec- ond quarter. Consumer expenditures slowed in the first quarter, but monthly data suggested some improvement toward the end of the quarter. Real PCE increased at a robust pace in March after having been unchanged in February, per- haps partly reflecting a delay in tax refunds from Febru- ary into March that was due, in part, to the partial gov- ernment shutdown. Similarly, sales of light motor vehi- cles rose sharply in March, although the average pace of sales in the first quarter was slower than in the fourth quarter. Key factors that influence consumer spend- ing—including a low unemployment rate, ongoing gains in real labor compensation, and still elevated measures of households’ net worth—were supportive of solid near-term gains in consumer expenditures. In addition, consumer sentiment, as measured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, edged down in April but was still upbeat. The staff reported preliminary anal- ysis of the levels of and trends in average household wealth by racial and ethnic groups as measured by the Federal Reserve Board’s Distributional Financial Ac- counts initiative. Real residential investment declined at a slower rate in the first quarter than it did over the course of 2018. Af- ter an appreciable uptick in January, starts of new single- family homes fell in February and were little changed in March. Meanwhile, starts of multifamily units rose in February and stayed at that level in March. Building per- mit issuance for new single-family homes—which tends to be a good indicator of the underlying trend in con- struction of such homes—declined a little in February and March. Sales of both new and existing homes in- creased, on net, over the February-and-March period. Growth in real private expenditures for business equip- ment and intellectual property slowed in the first quarter, reflecting both a slower increase in transportation equip- ment spending after a strong fourth-quarter gain and a decline in spending on other types of equipment outside of high tech. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft were little changed, on net, in February and March, but they rose for the quarter as a whole. Forward-looking indicators of business equip- ment spending pointed to sluggish increases in the near term. Orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased noticeably in March but were only a little above the level of shipments, and readings on busi- ness sentiment improved a bit but were still softer than last year. Real business expenditures for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector in- creased somewhat in the first quarter after having de- clined for several quarters. Investment in drilling and mining structures moved down in the first quarter, and Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in opera- tion—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—declined, on net, from mid-March through late April. a weak fourth quarter; GDP growth rebounded in the euro area and also appeared to pick up in Canada and the United Kingdom. Foreign inflation slowed further early this year, partly reflecting lower retail energy prices. Total real government purchases increased in the first quarter. Real purchases by the federal government were unchanged, as a relatively strong increase in defense pur- chases was offset by a decline in nondefense purchases stemming from the effects of the partial federal govern- ment shutdown. Real purchases by state and local gov- ernments increased briskly; payrolls of those govern- ments expanded solidly in the first quarter, and nominal state and local construction spending rose markedly. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed significantly in January and a touch more in February. After declining in December, the value of U.S. exports rose in January and February. However, the average dol- lar value of exports in the first two months of the year was only slightly above its fourth-quarter value. Imports fell in January before edging a touch higher in February, with the average of the two months declining relative to the fourth quarter. The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimated that the contribution of net exports to real GDP growth in the first quarter was about 1 percentage point. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending in March. This increase was somewhat slower than a year earlier, as core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) slowed to 1.6 percent, consumer food price inflation was a bit below core inflation, and consumer energy prices were little changed. The trimmed-mean measure of PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 2.0 percent over that 12-month pe- riod. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 1.9 percent over the 12 months ending in March, while core CPI in- flation was 2.0 percent. Recent readings on survey- based measures of longer-run inflation expectations— including those from the Michigan survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the Desk’s Survey of Pri- mary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed. Foreign economic growth in the first quarter was mixed. Among the emerging market economies (EMEs), real GDP contracted in South Korea and Mexico, but activ- ity in China strengthened, supported by tax cuts and the easing of credit conditions. In the advanced foreign economies, economic indicators were downbeat in Ja- pan but elsewhere pointed to some improvement from Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investor sentiment continued to improve over the inter- meeting period. Broad equity price indexes rose notably and corporate bond spreads narrowed amid a decline in market volatility, and financing conditions for busi- nesses and households also eased. Market participants cited more accommodative than expected monetary pol- icy communications coupled with strong U.S. and Chi- nese data releases and positive sentiment about trade ne- gotiations between the United States and China as fac- tors that contributed to these developments. Communications following the March FOMC meeting were generally viewed by investors as having a more ac- commodative tone than expected. The market-implied path for the federal funds rate shifted downward mod- estly, on net, resulting in a flat to slightly downward slop- ing expected path of the policy rate over the next few FOMC meetings. Market participants assigned greater probability to a lower target range of the federal funds rate than to a higher one beyond the next few meetings. Yields on nominal Treasury securities declined modestly, on net, during the intermeeting period. Investors cited larger-than-expected downward revisions in FOMC par- ticipants’ assessments of the future path of the policy rate in the Summary of Economic Projections, recent communications suggesting a patient approach to mon- etary policy, and weaker-than-expected euro-area data releases early in the period among factors that contrib- uted to this decrease. These factors reportedly out- weighed stronger-than-expected economic data releases for the United States and China and optimism related to trade negotiations between the two countries later in the period. Measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation Protected Securities were changed lit- tle, on net, and remained below their early fall 2018 lev- els. Major U.S. equity price indexes increased over the inter- meeting period, with the S&P 500 equity index returning to the levels it reached before its decline in the last quar- ter of 2018. Following the March FOMC meeting, bank stock prices declined, reportedly on concerns about the potential effects of a flat or inverted yield curve on bank profits; bank stocks subsequently retraced this decline partly in response to strong first-quarter earnings at some of the largest U.S. banks, ending the period a bit higher, on net. Option-implied volatility on the S&P _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 30–May 1, 2019Page 7 500—the VIX—decreased to a low level last seen in September 2018. Yields on corporate bonds continued to decline and spreads over yields of comparable-ma- turity Treasury securities narrowed. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble during the intermeeting period. The EFFR rose to 5 basis points above the IOER rate after the federal in- come tax deadline on April 15. While a similar dynamic occurred around previous tax dates, the magnitude of the change was larger than in previous years. Spreads on commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposits changed little across the maturity spectrum. Global sovereign yields declined along with U.S. Treas- ury yields following the March FOMC meeting. Foreign equity prices increased, on balance, amid optimism around trade negotiations between the United States and China, stronger-than-expected Chinese data, and accom- modative communications from some foreign central banks. Pronounced political and policy uncertainties led to a significant tightening of financial conditions in Tur- key, Argentina, and, to a lesser extent, Brazil, but spillo- vers to other EMEs were limited, and EME credit spreads were generally little changed on net. The broad dollar index increased modestly, supported by the strength of U.S. economic data relative to foreign data and the accommodative tone from foreign central banks. The British pound declined over the intermeet- ing period amid protracted discussions ahead of the orig- inal Brexit deadline, which was extended to October 31. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses re- mained generally accommodative during the intermeet- ing period. Gross issuance of corporate bonds was strong against a backdrop of narrower corporate spreads and improved risk sentiment. Issuance of institutional leveraged loans increased, but refinancing volumes were low and loans spreads remained somewhat elevated. Re- spondents to the April 2019 Senior Loan Officer Opin- ion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) re- ported easing some key terms for commercial and in- dustrial (C&I) loans to large and middle-market firms. For instance, banks reported narrowing loan rate spreads, easing loan covenants, and increasing the max- imum size and reducing the costs of credit lines to these firms. C&I loans on banks’ balance sheets grew at a ro- bust pace in the first quarter of 2019. Gross equity issu- ance edged up later in the period and the volume of cor- porate bond upgrades slightly outpaced that of down- grades, suggesting that credit quality of nonfinancial cor- porations, on balance, improved. Financing conditions for the commercial real estate (CRE) sector remained accommodative, and issuance of agency and non-agency commercial mortgage backed se- curities grew steadily. CRE loans on banks’ balance sheets continued to grow in the first quarter, albeit at a slower pace than in previous quarters. Banks in the April SLOOS reported weaker demand across all major types of CRE loans. However, they also reported tightening lending standards for these loans. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market also remained supportive over the intermeeting period. Home mortgage rates decreased about 5 basis points, to levels comparable with 2017. Consistent with lower mortgage rates, home-purchase mortgage originations increased, reversing a yearlong decline. Consumer credit conditions remained broadly support- ive of growth in household spending, with all categories of consumer loans recording steady growth in the first quarter. According to the April SLOOS, commercial banks left lending standards for auto loans and other consumer loans unchanged in the first quarter. How- ever, credit card interest rates rose and standards report- edly tightened for some borrowers. The staff provided an update on its assessments of po- tential risks to financial stability. The staff judged asset valuation pressures in equity and corporate debt markets to have increased significantly this year, though not quite to the elevated levels that prevailed for much of last year. The staff also reported that in the leveraged loan market risk spreads had narrowed and nonprice terms had loos- ened further. The build-up in overall nonfinancial busi- ness debt to levels close to historical highs relative to GDP was viewed as a factor that could amplify adverse shocks to the business sector and the economy more broadly. The staff continued to judge risks associated with household-sector debt as moderate. Both the risks associated with financial leverage and the vulnerabilities related to maturity transformation were viewed as being low, as they have been for some time. The staff also noted that the sustained growth of lending by banks to nonbank financial firms represented an increase in finan- cial interconnectedness. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the April–May FOMC meeting was revised up on net. Real GDP growth was forecast to slow in the near term from its solid first-quarter pace, as sizable con- tributions from inventory investment and net exports were not expected to persist. The projection for real Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ GDP growth over the medium term was revised up, pri- marily reflecting a lower assumed path for interest rates, a slightly higher trajectory for equity prices, and some- what less appreciation of the broad real dollar. The staff’s lower path for interest rates reflected a methodo- logical change in how the staff sets its assumptions about the future path for the federal funds rate in its forecast. Real GDP was forecast to expand at a rate above the staff’s estimate of potential output growth in 2019 and 2020 and then slow to a pace below potential output growth in 2021. The unemployment rate was projected to decline a little further below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate and to bottom out in late 2020. With labor market conditions still judged to be tight, the staff continued to assume that projected employment gains would manifest in smaller-than-usual downward pressure on the unemployment rate and in larger-than- usual upward pressure on the labor force participation rate. The staff’s forecast for inflation was revised down slightly, reflecting some recent softer-than-expected readings on consumer price inflation that were not ex- pected to persist along with the staff’s assessment that the level to which inflation would tend to move in the absence of resource slack or supply shocks was a bit lower in the medium term than previously assumed. As a result, core PCE price inflation was expected to move up in the near term but nevertheless to run just below 2 percent over the medium term. Total PCE price infla- tion was forecast to run a bit below core inflation in 2020 and 2021, reflecting projected declines in energy prices. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as generally similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff also saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as roughly balanced. On the upside, household spending and busi- ness investment could expand faster than the staff pro- jected, supported by the tax cuts enacted at the end of 2017, still strong overall labor market conditions, favor- able financial conditions, and upbeat consumer senti- ment. On the downside, the softening in some eco- nomic indicators since late last year could be the leading edge of a significant slowing in the pace of economic growth. Moreover, trade policies and foreign economic developments could move in directions that have signif- icant negative effects on U.S. economic growth. Risks to the inflation projection also were seen as balanced. The upside risk that inflation could increase more than expected in an economy that was still projected to be operating notably above potential for an extended pe- riod was counterbalanced by the downside risks that re- cent soft data on consumer prices could persist and that longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than was assumed in the staff forecast, as well as the possibil- ity that the dollar could appreciate if foreign economic conditions deteriorated. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants agreed that labor markets had remained strong over the intermeeting period and that economic activity had risen at a solid rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had stayed low. Participants also observed that growth in household spending and business fixed invest- ment had slowed in the first quarter. Overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy, both measured on a 12-month basis, had declined and were running below 2 percent. On balance, market-based measures of inflation compensation had remained low in recent months, and survey-based measures of longer- term inflation expectations were little changed. Participants continued to view sustained expansion of economic activity, with strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcomes. Participants noted the unexpected strength in first-quarter GDP growth, but some observed that the composition of growth, with large contributions from inventories and net exports and more modest contributions from con- sumption and investment, suggested that GDP growth in the near term would likely moderate from its strong pace of last year. For this year as a whole, a number of participants mentioned that they had marked up their projections for real GDP growth, reflecting, in part, the strong first-quarter reading. Participants cited continu- ing strength in labor market conditions, improvements in consumer confidence and in financial conditions, or diminished downside risks both domestically and abroad, as factors likely to support solid growth over the remainder of the year. Some participants observed that, in part because of the waning impetus from fiscal policy and past removal of monetary policy accommodation, they expected real GDP growth to slow over the me- dium term, moving back toward their estimates of trend output growth. In their discussion of the household sector, participants discussed recent indicators, including retail sales and light motor vehicle sales for March, which rose from rel- atively weak readings in some previous months. Taken _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 30–May 1, 2019Page 9 together, these developments suggested that the first- quarter softness in household spending was likely to prove temporary. With the strong jobs market, rising incomes, and upbeat consumer sentiment, growth in PCE in coming months was expected to be solid. Sev- eral participants also noted that while the housing sector had been a drag on GDP growth for some time, recent data pointed to some signs of stabilization. With mort- gage rates at their lowest levels in more than a year, a few participants thought that residential construction could begin to make positive contributions to GDP growth in the near term; a few others were less optimistic. Participants noted that growth of business fixed invest- ment had moderated in the first quarter relative to the average pace recorded last year and discussed whether this more moderate growth was likely to persist. A num- ber of participants expressed optimism that there would be continued growth in capital expenditures this year, al- beit probably at a slower pace than in 2018. Several par- ticipants observed that financial conditions and business sentiment had continued to improve, consistent with re- ports from business contacts in a number of Districts; however, a few others reported less buoyant business sentiment Many participants suggested that their own concerns from earlier in the year about downside risks from slowing global economic growth and the deterio- ration in financial conditions or similar concerns ex- pressed by their business contacts had abated to some extent. However, a few participants noted that ongoing challenges in the agricultural sector, including those as- sociated with trade uncertainty and low prices, had been exacerbated by severe flooding in recent weeks. Participants observed that inflation pressures remained muted and that the most recent data on overall inflation, and inflation for items other than food and energy, had come in lower than expected. At least part of the recent softness in inflation could be attributed to idiosyncratic factors that seemed likely to have only transitory effects on inflation, including unusually sharp declines in the prices of apparel and of portfolio management services. Some research suggests that idiosyncratic factors that largely affected acylical sectors in the economy had ac- counted for a substantial portion of the fluctuations in inflation over the past couple of years. Consistent with the view that recent lower inflation readings could be temporary, a number of participants mentioned the trimmed mean measure of PCE price inflation, pro- duced by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, which re- moves the influence of unusually large changes in the prices of individual items in either direction; these par- ticipants observed that the trimmed mean measure had been stable at or close to 2 percent over recent months. Participants continued to view inflation near the Com- mittee’s symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely outcome, but, in light of recent, softer inflation readings, some viewed the downside risks to inflation as having increased. Some participants also expressed concerns that long-term inflation expectations could be below lev- els consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent target or at risk of falling below that level. Participants agreed that labor market conditions re- mained strong. Job gains in the March employment re- port were solid, the unemployment rate remained low, and, while the labor force participation rate moved down a touch, it remained high relative to estimates of its un- derlying demographically driven, downward trend. Con- tacts in a number of Districts continued to report short- ages of qualified workers, in some cases inducing busi- nesses to find novel ways to attract new workers. A few participants commented that labor market conditions in their Districts were putting upward pressure on compen- sation levels for lower-wage jobs, although there were few reports of a broad-based pickup in wage growth. Several participants noted that business contacts ex- pressed optimism that despite tight labor markets they would be able to find workers or would find technolog- ical solutions for labor shortage problems. Participants commented on risks associated with their outlook for economic activity over the medium term. Some participants viewed risks to the downside for real GDP growth as having decreased, partly because pro- spects for a sharp slowdown in global economic growth, particularly in China and Europe, had diminished. These improvements notwithstanding, most participants ob- served that downside risks to the outlook for growth re- main. In discussing developments in financial markets, a num- ber of participants noted that financial market condi- tions had improved following the period of stress ob- served over the fourth quarter of last year and that the volatility in prices and financial conditions had subsided. These factors were thought to have helped buoy con- sumer and business confidence or to have mitigated short-term downside risks to the real economy. More generally, the improvement in financial conditions was regarded by many participants as providing support for the outlook for economic growth and employment. Among those participants who commented on financial stability, most highlighted recent developments related to leveraged loans and corporate bonds as well as the Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ current high level of nonfinancial corporate indebted- ness. A few participants suggested that heightened lev- erage and associated debt burdens could render the busi- ness sector more sensitive to economic downturns than would otherwise be the case. A couple of participants suggested that increases in bank capital in current cir- cumstances with solid economic growth and strong profits could help support financial and macroeconomic stability over the longer run. A couple of participants observed that asset valuations in some markets appeared high, relative to fundamentals. A few participants com- mented on the positive role that the Board’s semi-annual Financial Stability Report could play in facilitating public discussion of risks that could be present in some seg- ments of the financial system. In their discussion of monetary policy, participants agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the cur- rent target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. Participants judged that the labor market remained strong, and that information received over the intermeeting period showed that economic activity grew at a solid rate. However, both overall inflation and in- flation for items other than food and energy had de- clined and were running below the Committee’s 2 per- cent objective. A number of participants observed that some of the risks and uncertainties that had surrounded their outlooks earlier in the year had moderated, includ- ing those related to the global economic outlook, Brexit, and trade negotiations. That said, these and other sources of uncertainty remained. In light of global eco- nomic and financial developments as well as muted in- flation pressures, participants generally agreed that a pa- tient approach to determining future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate remained appro- priate. Participants noted that even if global economic and financial conditions continued to improve, a patient approach would likely remain warranted, especially in an environment of continued moderate economic growth and muted inflation pressures. Participants discussed the potential policy implications of continued low inflation readings. Many participants viewed the recent dip in PCE inflation as likely to be transitory, and participants generally anticipated that a patient approach to policy adjustments was likely to be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activ- ity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. Several participants also judged that patience in adjusting policy was consistent with the Committee’s balanced approach to achieving its objectives in current circumstances in which resource utilization appeared to be high while in- flation continued to run below the Committee’s sym- metric 2 percent objective. However, a few participants noted that if the economy evolved as they expected, the Committee would likely need to firm the stance of mon- etary policy to sustain the economic expansion and keep inflation at levels consistent with the Committee’s objec- tive, or that the Committee would need to be attentive to the possibility that inflation pressures could build quickly in an environment of tight resource utilization. In contrast, a few other participants observed that sub- dued inflation coupled with real wage gains roughly in line with productivity growth might indicate that re- source utilization was not as high as the recent low read- ings of the unemployment rate by themselves would sug- gest. Several participants commented that if inflation did not show signs of moving up over coming quarters, there was a risk that inflation expectations could become anchored at levels below those consistent with the Com- mittee’s symmetric 2 percent objective—a development that could make it more difficult to achieve the 2 percent inflation objective on a sustainable basis over the longer run. Participants emphasized that their monetary policy decisions would continue to depend on their assess- ments of the economic outlook and risks to the outlook, as informed by a wide range of data. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members judged that the information received since the Committee met in March indicated that the la- bor market remained strong and that economic activity had risen at a solid rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Growth of household spending and business fixed investment had slowed in the first quarter. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy had declined and were running below 2 percent. On balance, market-based measures of inflation compensation had remained low in recent months, and survey-based measures of longer- term inflation expectations were little changed. In their consideration of the economic outlook, mem- bers noted that financial conditions had improved since the turn of the year, and many uncertainties affecting the U.S. and global economic outlooks had receded, though some risks remained. Despite solid economic growth and a strong labor market, inflation pressures remained muted. Members continued to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 30–May 1, 2019Page 11 objective as the most likely outcomes for the U.S. econ- omy. In light of global economic and financial develop- ments and muted inflation pressures, members con- curred that the Committee could be patient as it deter- mined what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support those outcomes. After assessing current conditions and the outlook for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- bers decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. Members agreed that in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Com- mittee would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum-em- ployment and symmetric 2 percent inflation objectives. They reiterated that this assessment would take into ac- count a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pres- sures and inflation expectations, and readings on finan- cial and international developments. More generally, members noted that decisions regarding near-term ad- justments of the stance of monetary policy would appro- priately remain dependent on the evolution of the out- look as informed by incoming data. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed to remove references to a slowing in the pace of economic growth and little-changed payroll employ- ment, consistent with stronger incoming information on these indicators. The description of growth in house- hold spending and business fixed investment in the first quarter was revised to recognize that incoming data had confirmed earlier information that suggested these as- pects of economic activity had slowed at that time. Members also agreed to revise the description of infla- tion to note that inflation for items other than food and energy had declined and was now running below 2 per- cent. Members observed that a patient approach to determin- ing future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate would likely remain appropriate for some time, especially in an environment of moderate eco- nomic growth and muted inflation pressures, even if global economic and financial conditions continued to improve. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective May 2, 2019, the Federal Open Mar- ket Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to main- tain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2¼ to 2½ percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol- iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer- ing rate of 2.25 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-coun- terparty limit of $30 billion per day. Effective May 2, 2019, the Committee directs the Desk to roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each calendar month that exceeds $15 billion. The Committee directs the Desk to continue re- investing in agency mortgage-backed securities the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during each calendar month that exceeds $20 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March indicates that the labor market remains strong and that eco- nomic activity rose at a solid rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Growth of household spending and business fixed investment slowed in the first quarter. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy have de- clined and are running below 2 percent. On bal- Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ ance, market-based measures of inflation com- pensation have remained low in recent months, and survey-based measures of longer-term in- flation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. The Committee continues to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective as the most likely outcomes. In light of global economic and financial developments and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will be patient as it determines what future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support these outcomes. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Richard H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Randal K. Quarles, and Eric Rosengren. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2¼ to 2½ per- cent, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to lower the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances to 2.35 percent, effective May 2, 2019. Setting the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve bal- ances 15 basis points below the top of the target range for the federal funds rate was intended to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the FOMC’s target range. The Board of Governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the pri- mary credit rate at the existing level of 3.00 percent, ef- fective May 2, 2019. Update from Subcommittee on Communications Governor Clarida reported on the progress of the review of the Federal Reserve’s strategic framework for mone- tary policy. Fed Listens events to hear stakeholders’ views on the strategy, tools, and communications that would best enable the Federal Reserve to meet its statu- tory objectives of maximum employment and price sta- bility had already taken place in two Federal Reserve Dis- tricts. Numerous additional events were planned, in- cluding a research conference scheduled for June at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Following these pub- lic activities, the Committee was on course to begin its deliberations about the strategic framework at meetings in the second half of 2019. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 18– 19, 2019. The meeting adjourned at 9:50 a.m. on May 1, 2019. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on April 9, 2019, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on March 19–20, 2019. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 30–May 1, 2019Page 13 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee June 18–19, 2019 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 18, 2019, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 19, 2019, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Richard H. Clarida Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Randal K. Quarles Eric Rosengren Lorie K. Logan, Manager pro tem,3 System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,4 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jennifer J. Burns, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Trevor A. Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, of Board Members, Board of Governors Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, Anna Paulson, Christopher J. Waller, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson,2 Associate Economists Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian M. Doyle, Wendy E. Dunn,2 Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Jane E. Ihrig and Don H. Kim, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended Tuesday session only. 3 In the absence of the manager, the Committee’s Rules of Organization provide that the deputy manager acts as manager pro tem. 4 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Marnie Gillis DeBoer and Min Wei, Associate Andre Anderson, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Bank of Atlanta Christopher J. Gust,4 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Matteo Iacoviello and Paul R. Wood,2 Deputy Associate Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,4 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors David Altig and Kartik B. Athreya, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Richmond, respectively Edward S. Knotek II, Paolo A. Pesenti, Mark L.J. Wright, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,4 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, New York, Minneapolis, and New York, respectively Burcu Duygan-Bump, Andrew Figura, Glenn Follette, Roc Armenter, Patrick Dwyer,4 George A. Kahn, Patrick E. McCabe, and Paul A. Smith, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Laura Lipscomb,4 Zeynep Senyuz,4 and Rebecca Zarutskie, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Steve Spurry,4 Assistant Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors Giovanni Olivei, Rania Perry,4 Benedict Wensley,4 and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, Kansas City, Boston, New York, New York, and New York, respectively Gara Afonso4 and Scott Sherman,4 Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Matthew Malloy,4 Section Chief, Division of Monetary Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, Senior Research Advisor, Affairs, Board of Governors Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office Jim Dolmas, Senior Research Economist, Federal of the Secretary, Board of Governors Reserve Bank of Dallas Mark A. Carlson,4 Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Sean Savage, Senior Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Heather A. Wiggins,4 Group Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Maria Otoo, Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Lubomir Petrasek, Marcelo Rezende, and Francisco Vazquez-Grande, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Patrice Robitaille,2 Principal Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Donielle A. Winford, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Standing Repurchase Facility The staff briefed the Committee on the possible role of a standing fixed-rate repurchase agreement (repo) facility as part of the monetary policy implementation frame- work; a facility of this type would allow counterparties to obtain temporary liquidity at a fixed rate of interest through repurchase transactions with the Federal Re- serve involving their holdings of select securities eligible for open market operations. The staff presentation noted how such a facility could provide a backstop against unusual spikes in the federal funds rate and other money market rates and might also provide incentives for banks to shift the composition of their portfolios of liquid assets away from reserves and toward high-quality securities. Key design features for such a facility, includ- ing the fixed rate offered to counterparties, the set of eligible counterparties, and the range of securities eligi- ble to be placed at the facility, would influence the effec- tiveness of a facility in achieving either of these objec- tives. The staff noted a number of considerations that could arise in setting these design parameters, including potential repercussions in unsecured and secured fund- Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ ing markets, the eligibility of counterparties in weak fi- nancial condition, the potential that turning to such a fa- cility could become stigmatized, and issues of a level playing field across different classes of counterparties. Participants commented on a number of issues in con- nection with key design parameters for a repo facility. In terms of the setting of the facility’s fixed rate, many par- ticipants acknowledged a tradeoff in determining the level of the rate relative to other money market rates. On the one hand, establishing the rate at a narrow spread above money market rates would likely provide better interest rate control and could also be helpful in avoiding stigma that can be associated with the use of standing lending facilities with fixed rates set well above the level of money market rates. On the other hand, setting the rate close to the level of money market rates could result in very sizable Federal Reserve operations on a daily ba- sis that could be viewed as disintermediating the activity of private entities in money markets. In considering the eligible set of counterparties for a repo facility, a number of participants noted that making the facility available only to primary dealers would likely imply that the effects of the facility would be most direct on repo markets, while the influence on the federal funds market would be only indirect. A couple of par- ticipants noted that, particularly if banks were eligible counterparties, it would be important for counterparties of all sizes to have access to funding through the facility on the same terms. A few participants noted that a fa- cility could enhance financial stability by providing a means by which nonbank counterparties can readily ob- tain liquidity against their high-quality assets. A couple of other participants noted ways that a repo facility could have unintended effects on financial stability; for exam- ple, if reserves help support overall financial stability, a facility that significantly reduced the demand for re- serves might not be beneficial. Many participants commented on issues associated with the availability of such a facility to firms in different states of financial condition. Several thought there should not be a guarantee of access to such a facility re- gardless of a firm’s financial condition, while a number of others were willing to consider how such a facility could be structured to work effectively in a stressed en- vironment where high-quality liquid assets were used as collateral. A few participants noted that the availability of the facility to banks during periods of stress, particu- larly when they might be in weak financial condition, could be an important factor determining whether a fa- cility would significantly reduce banks’ demand for re- serves in normal times. In their discussion of key objectives for establishing a repo facility, some participants raised questions about whether such a facility is needed in an ample-reserves framework, noting that the current ample-reserves re- gime has provided good interest rate control. Other par- ticipants commented on the potential benefits of such a facility as a way to enhance interest rate control in the current implementation regime or as a means to operate in the current implementation framework but with a sig- nificantly smaller quantity of reserves than at present. A couple of participants noted that a facility could damp volatility in repo rates. Several participants noted that a facility could possibly aid with multiple policy objectives. A number of participants noted that the policy objec- tives for a fixed-rate standing repo facility would have implications for the appropriate design for the facility. Several participants recognized the need to carefully evaluate possible parameter settings to guard against un- intended consequences, including the potential for moral hazard or a more volatile Federal Reserve balance sheet. In addition, several participants highlighted the importance of evaluating whether other tools or initia- tives could better achieve the desired goals. Overall, no decisions were reached at this meeting; participants stated that additional work would be necessary to clearly define the objectives of such a facility and to evaluate its potential net benefits. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager pro tem discussed developments in global financial markets over the intermeeting period. Trade- related developments reportedly led many market partic- ipants to take a more pessimistic view of the U.S. eco- nomic outlook. Equity prices and interest rates fell no- ticeably after the announcement of higher tariffs on Chi- nese imports in early May and then again after news that tariffs might be imposed on Mexican imports. In re- sponse to these developments, markets appeared to be- come more sensitive to incoming news about the out- look for global growth and inflation, including data that pointed to a continued subdued inflation environment and to slower economic growth in the United States and abroad. Treasury yields fell sharply and far-forward measures of inflation compensation dropped significantly in the United States and abroad. Against this backdrop, mar- ket participants reportedly viewed communications by Minutes of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Federal Reserve officials as signaling a greater likelihood of a cut in the target range for the federal funds rate later in the year. The expected path of the federal funds rate embedded in futures prices shifted down significantly over the period. In the euro area, far-forward measures of inflation com- pensation fell noticeably, and market participants report- edly increasingly came to believe that further monetary policy accommodation would be needed. Late in the in- termeeting period, remarks by European Central Bank (ECB) President Draghi were interpreted as suggesting increased odds of further asset purchases by the ECB. Euro-area peripheral spreads to German equivalents moved sharply lower, and far-forward inflation compen- sation recovered modestly. The manager pro tem turned next to a review of money market developments and Open Market Desk opera- tions. Money market rates generally stabilized at mod- estly lower levels over the intermeeting period, likely re- flecting both the technical adjustment in the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate following the May FOMC meeting and a sizable increase in reserve balances asso- ciated with a decline in balances held by the Treasury in its account at the Federal Reserve. Market participants reported seeing slightly more pass-through from repo rates to the federal funds rate on days with heightened firmness in repo rates. Market participants attributed re- cent increases in repo rates on month-end and mid- month Treasury auction settlement dates in part to ele- vated net dealer inventories of Treasury securities, which dealers finance in the repo market. Regarding open market operations over the period, given the substantial decline in mortgage rates over re- cent months and an associated increase in refinancing activity, principal payments on the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) had recently moved somewhat above the $20 billion monthly redemption cap. As a result, the Desk began in May to reinvest agency MBS principal payments in ex- cess of the cap. Based on current market rates and pre- payment forecasts, the Desk expected to reinvest mod- est amounts of agency MBS over the coming months and possibly again in 2020, particularly during the sum- mer months. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available for the June 18–19 meeting indicated that labor market conditions remained strong. Real gross domestic product (GDP) appeared to be ris- ing at a moderate rate in the second quarter, as house- hold spending growth picked up from the weak first quarter while business fixed investment was soft. Con- sumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month per- centage change in the price index for personal consump- tion expenditures (PCE), was below 2 percent in April. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expecta- tions were little changed. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded solidly, on average, in April and May; however, job gains slowed sharply in May after a strong increase in April. The un- employment rate declined to 3.6 percent in April and re- mained there in May, its lowest level in 50 years. The labor force participation rate moved down somewhat in April and held steady in May, remaining close to its av- erage over the previous few years; the employment-to- population ratio stayed flat in April and May. The un- employment rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics decreased, on net, over April and May and were below their levels at the end of the previous eco- nomic expansion, though persistent differentials in un- employment rates across groups remained. The average share of workers employed part time for economic rea- sons over April and May continued to be below the lows reached in late 2007. The rate of private-sector job openings moved up in March and held steady in April, while the rate of quits was unchanged at a high level; the four-week moving average of initial claims for unem- ployment insurance benefits through early June was near historically low levels. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending in May, slightly lower than in April but somewhat faster than a year earlier. Total labor compensation per hour in the business sector increased 1.6 percent over the four quarters ending in the first quarter, slower than a year earlier. Total consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending in April. This increase was slower than a year earlier, as core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) moved down to 1.6 percent, consumer food price inflation remained well below core inflation, and consumer energy price infla- tion slowed considerably to about the same rate as core inflation. The trimmed mean measure of PCE price in- flation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dal- Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ las was 2.0 percent over that 12-month period. The con- sumer price index (CPI) rose 1.8 percent over the 12 months ending in May, while core CPI inflation was 2.0 percent. The monthly change in core PCE prices in April and the staff’s estimate of the change in May— based on the CPI data and the relevant prices from the producer price index—were higher in both of these months than the very low readings seen in January through March. Recent survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. While measures from the Desk’s Survey of Pri- mary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants were lit- tle changed, the preliminary June reading from the Uni- versity of Michigan Surveys of Consumers dropped sig- nificantly to below its range in recent years. Growth in real consumer expenditures appeared to pick up to a solid rate in the second quarter from its weak first-quarter pace. The components of the nominal retail sales data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to estimate PCE increased in May, and the retail sales data for the previous two months were revised up notably. Sales of light motor vehicles rose sharply in May after stepping down in April. Key factors that influence con- sumer spending—including a low unemployment rate, further gains in real disposable income, and still elevated measures of households’ net worth—were supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. In addition, the Michigan survey measure of consumer sentiment edged down in the preliminary June reading but was still at an upbeat level. Real residential investment in the second quarter looked to be continuing the decline seen earlier in the year, al- beit at a slower rate. Starts of new single-family homes rose in April but fell back in May, while starts of multi- family units increased over both months. Building per- mit issuance for new single-family homes—which tends to be a good indicator of the underlying trend in con- struction of such homes—was at roughly the same level in May as its first-quarter average. Sales of new homes fell notably in April after a marked gain in March, and existing home sales edged down in April. Real nonresidential private fixed investment appeared soft in the second quarter. Real private expenditures for business equipment and intellectual property looked to be roughly flat, as nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft moved sideways in April. Forward-looking indicators of business equipment spending pointed to possible decreases in the near term. Orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft declined notably in April and continued to be below the level of shipments, readings on business sentiment dete- riorated further, and analysts’ expectations of firms’ longer-term profit growth moved down sharply. Nom- inal business expenditures for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector decreased in April, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to decline through mid-June. Industrial production moved down in April and picked up in May, leaving output about flat over those two months, but production was lower than at the beginning of the year. Manufacturing output declined, on net, over April and May, although mining output expanded. Au- tomakers’ assembly schedules suggested that the pro- duction of light motor vehicles would move up in the near term, but new orders indexes from national and re- gional manufacturing surveys pointed to continued soft total factory output in the coming months. Moreover, industry news indicated that aircraft production would continue to be slow in the near term. Total real government purchases appeared to be rising solidly in the second quarter. Federal government pur- chases were being boosted by strong increases in defense spending through May and the return of nondefense purchases to more typical levels after the partial federal government shutdown in the first quarter. Real pur- chases by state and local governments seemed to be ris- ing modestly; total payrolls of these governments edged down over April and May, but nominal state and local construction spending expanded notably in April. Net exports added substantially to real GDP growth in the first quarter, as exports increased robustly and im- ports fell. After widening in March, the nominal trade deficit narrowed in April; even though exports declined, imports declined by more. The available data suggested that net exports would be a small drag on real GDP growth in the second quarter. Growth in the foreign economies remained subdued in the first quarter, as soft growth in the Canadian economy and weakness in several emerging market economies (EMEs) offset somewhat stronger growth in other ad- vanced foreign economies (AFEs) and in China’s econ- omy. Recent indicators suggested that the pace of eco- nomic activity picked up in Canada in the second quarter but slowed in some other AFEs. Economic growth also appeared to have slowed in China. Foreign inflation re- mained subdued but rose a bit from lows earlier in the year, in part reflecting higher retail energy prices in many economies. Minutes of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investors’ concerns about downside risks to the eco- nomic outlook weighed on financial markets over the in- termeeting period. Market participants cited negative news about international trade tensions and, to a lesser extent, soft U.S. and foreign economic data as factors that contributed to these developments. Nominal Treasury yields posted notable declines and the expected path of policy shifted down considerably over the pe- riod. Equity prices declined, on net, and corporate bond spreads widened. However, financing conditions for businesses and households generally remained support- ive of economic growth. FOMC communications following the May meeting had little net effect on yields, though they rose modestly fol- lowing the Chair’s press conference. Later in the period, the expected path of policy moved down, partly in re- sponse to incoming information pointing to a weaker economic outlook. The market-implied probability for a 25 basis point cut in the target range for the federal funds rate by the July FOMC meeting rose to about 85 percent. The market-implied path for the federal funds rate for 2019 and 2020 shifted down markedly. Based on overnight index swap rates, investors expected the federal funds rate to decline about 60 basis points by the end of this year—a downward revision of 40 basis points over the intermeeting period. Longer-term Treasury yields fell considerably over the period, with the declines driven primarily by negative headlines about trade tensions between the United States and two major trading partners, China and Mexico. Softer-than-expected domestic economic news, such as the weaker-than-expected employment data, also con- tributed to the declines. The spread between 10-year and 3-month Treasury yields fell to the bottom decile of its distribution since 1971. Measures of inflation com- pensation derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Se- curities also decreased notably over the period along with declines in oil prices. Major U.S. equity price indexes declined, on net, over the intermeeting period. Equity prices fell notably over the first few weeks of the period, primarily in response to the escalation of trade tensions with China and Mex- ico. Firms with high China exposure and those in cycli- cal sectors—such as energy, information technology, in- dustrials, communication services, and banks—posted particularly large losses. However, later in the period, stock prices regained a significant portion of their losses amid an easing of trade tensions with Mexico and expec- tations of a more accommodative stance of policy. One- month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index— the VIX—increased over the period, and corporate credit spreads widened. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period. Overnight interest rates in short-term funding markets declined in response to the technical adjustment that reduced the IOER rate 5 basis points to 2.35 percent after the May FOMC meeting. The average of the effective federal funds rate over the period was about 6 basis points below the level just before the May FOMC meeting, well within the FOMC’s target range. Rates on commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit also declined some- what. Escalation of trade tensions and soft economic data also weighed on foreign financial markets. Most major global equity price indexes declined, on net, and EME sover- eign spreads widened modestly. In the AFEs, policy ex- pectations and sovereign yields declined notably, in part reflecting more-accommodative monetary policy com- munications by major central banks. The broad dollar index rose a bit over the intermeeting period. The Japanese yen and Swiss franc, which are viewed as safe-haven currencies, appreciated against the dollar. The British pound depreciated amid increased uncertainty around Brexit. Increased trade tensions con- tributed to some depreciation of the Chinese renminbi. The value of the Mexican peso against the dollar fluctu- ated in response to announcements related to potential tariffs on imports from Mexico but ended the period only slightly lower. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses contin- ued to be accommodative overall. Gross issuance of corporate bonds was strong in May following a spell of seasonal weakness in April. The credit quality of nonfi- nancial corporations remained solid, as the volume of nonfinancial corporate bond upgrades outpaced that of downgrades in May. Issuance in the institutional syndi- cated leveraged loan market was subdued in April but rebounded in May, reflecting strong issuance beyond that associated with refinancing of maturing leveraged loans. Meanwhile, commercial and industrial lending slowed somewhat in April and May after a period of stronger growth in the first quarter. Small business credit market conditions were little changed, and credit conditions in municipal bond markets stayed accommo- dative on net. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions continued to be generally accommodative. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ securities (CMBS) Commercial mortgage-backed spreads widened slightly over the intermeeting period but remained near the low end of their post-crisis range. Issuance of agency and non-agency CMBS was solid in May, and CRE lending by banks expanded in April and May at a slower rate than in the first quarter. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market also remained supportive over the intermeeting period. Home mortgage rates decreased about 40 basis points. Since last November, mortgage rates had declined more than 1 percentage point, contributing to an increase in home-purchase mortgage originations to the solid levels seen in 2017. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets were little changed in recent months and remained generally supportive of household spending, although the supply of credit to consumers with subprime credit scores con- tinued to be tight. Consumer credit expanded at a mod- erate pace in the first quarter, with bank credit data pointing to a pickup in April and May. Conditions in the consumer asset-backed securities market remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period, with robust issuance and spreads that were little changed at low levels. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the June FOMC meeting was revised down somewhat on balance. Real GDP growth was forecast to slow to a moderate rate in the second quarter and move down to a more modest pace in the second half of the year, primarily reflecting a more downbeat near-term outlook for business fixed investment. The projection for real GDP growth over the medium term was little changed, as the effects of a higher projected path for the broad real dollar and lower trajectory for foreign eco- nomic growth were largely counterbalanced by a lower projected path for interest rates. Real GDP was forecast to expand at a rate a little above the staff’s estimate of potential output growth in 2019 and 2020 and then slow to a pace slightly below potential output growth in 2021. The unemployment rate was projected to be roughly flat through 2021 and remain below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate. With labor market conditions judged to be tight, the staff continued to assume that 5 In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank presidents submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2019 through 2021 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of the appropriate path projected employment gains would manifest in smaller- than-usual downward pressure on the unemployment rate and in larger-than-usual upward pressure on the la- bor force participation rate. The staff’s forecast for inflation was little changed on balance. The forecast for total PCE price inflation this year was revised down somewhat, reflecting a lower near-term projection for energy prices. The core infla- tion forecast for this year was unchanged at a level below 2 percent. Both total and core inflation were projected to move up slightly next year, as the low readings early this year were expected to be transitory, but nevertheless to continue to run below 2 percent. The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion as generally similar to the average of the past 20 years, although uncertainty was seen to have in- creased since the previous forecast. Moreover, the staff also judged that the risks to the forecast for real GDP growth had tilted to the downside, with a skew to the upside for the unemployment rate. The increased un- certainty and shift to downside risks around the projec- tion reflected the staff’s assessment that international trade tensions and foreign economic developments seemed more likely to move in directions that could have significant negative effects on the U.S. economy than to resolve more favorably than assumed. With the risks to the forecast for economic activity tilted to the downside, the risks to the inflation projection were also viewed as having a downward skew. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants judged that uncertainties and downside risks surrounding the economic outlook had increased signif- icantly over recent weeks. While they continued to view a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely out- comes, many participants attached significant odds to scenarios with less favorable outcomes.5 Moreover, nearly all participants in their submissions to the Sum- mary of Economic Projections (SEP), had revised down their assessment of the appropriate path of the federal for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections repre- sented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under ap- propriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. These projections and policy assess- ments are described in the Summary of Economic Projec- tions, which is an addendum to these minutes. Minutes of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ funds rate over the projection period that would be con- sistent with their modal economic outlook. Many par- ticipants noted that, since the Committee’s previous meeting, the economy appeared to have lost some mo- mentum and pointed to a number of factors supporting that view including recent weak indicators for business confidence, business spending and manufacturing activ- ity; trade developments; and signs of slowing global eco- nomic growth. Many participants noted that they viewed the risks to their growth and inflation projec- tions, such as those emanating from greater uncertainty about trade, as shifting notably over recent weeks and that risks were now weighted to the downside. Participants discussed at some length the softness in var- ious indicators of business fixed investment in the sec- ond quarter. Incoming data on shipments and orders of new capital goods looked weak and recent readings from some manufacturing surveys had dropped sharply. Pri- vate sector analysts had marked down their forecasts for longer-term corporate profit growth. Manufacturing production had posted declines so far this year. In addi- tion, contacts reported that softer export sales, weaker economic activity abroad, and elevated levels of uncer- tainty regarding the global outlook were weighing on business sentiment and leading firms to reassess plans for investment spending. Several participants noted comments from business contacts reporting that their base case now assumed that uncertainties about the global outlook would remain prominent over the me- dium term and would continue to act as a drag on in- vestment. Several participants also noted reports from some business contacts in the manufacturing sector sug- gesting that they were putting capital expenditures or hir- ing plans on hold and were reevaluating their global sup- ply chains in light of trade uncertainties. A couple of participants, however, pointed to signs that investment might pick up, including reports from some contacts that their orders and shipments remained strong and that some contacts planned to hire more workers. A few par- ticipants also noted ongoing challenges in the agricul- tural sector, including those associated with increased trade uncertainty, weak export markets, wet weather, and severe flooding. A few participants remarked on the de- cline in energy prices and the associated reduction in ac- tivity in the energy sector. In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that available data on consumer spending had been solid, supported by a strong labor market and rising incomes. Several participants also noted that measures of consumer sentiment remained upbeat, and a couple noted that their business contacts confirmed the view that consumer spending had rebounded from the weak patch earlier in the year. Several participants, however, noted that tariffs could eventually become a drag on consumer durables spending, especially if additional tar- iffs on consumer goods were imposed, and that they would be monitoring incoming data for signs of this ef- fect. A couple of participants noted that the continued softness in the housing sector was a concern, even though the decline in mortgage rates since last fall was expected to provide stronger impetus for activity; a cou- ple of participants were somewhat optimistic that resi- dential investment would pick up. In their discussion of the labor market, participants cited evidence that conditions remained strong, including the very low unemployment rate and the fact that job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months. That said, job gains in May were weaker than expected and, in light of other developments, participants judged that it would be important to closely monitor incoming data for any signs of softening in labor market conditions. Reports from business contacts pointed to continued strong la- bor demand, with many firms planning to hire more workers. Economy-wide wage growth was seen as being broadly consistent with modest average rates of labor productivity growth in recent years. However, a few par- ticipants noted that there were limited signs of upward pressure on wage inflation. A few participants cited the combination of muted inflation pressures, moderate wage growth, and expanding employment as a possible indication that some slack remained in the labor market. Partly reflecting that combination of developments, sev- eral participants had revised down their SEP estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. Participants noted that readings on overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy had come in lower than expected over recent months. In light of recent softer inflation readings, perceptions of downside risks to growth, and global disinflationary pressures, many participants viewed the risks to the outlook for in- flation as weighted to the downside. Several participants indicated that, while headline inflation had been close to 2 percent last year, it was noteworthy that inflation had softened this year despite continued strong labor market conditions. Participants generally noted that they re- vised down their SEP projections of inflation for the current year in light of recent data. They still anticipated that the overall rate of inflation would firm somewhat and move up to the Committee’s longer-run symmetric objective of 2 percent over the next few years. Con- sistent with that view, several participants commented that alternative measures of inflation that removed the Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ influence of unusually large changes in the prices of in- dividual items in either direction were running around 2 percent. However, a number of participants antici- pated that the return to 2 percent would take longer than previously projected even with an assumed path for the federal funds rate that was lower than in their previous projections. In their discussion of indicators of inflation expecta- tions, participants generally observed that market-based measures of inflation compensation had declined and were at low levels. Some participants also noted that re- cent readings on some survey measures of consumers’ inflation expectations had declined or stood at histori- cally low levels. Many participants further noted that longer-term inflation expectations could be somewhat below levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective, or that the continued weakness in in- flation could prompt expectations to slip further. These developments might make it more difficult to achieve their inflation objective on a sustained basis. However, several participants remarked that inflation expectations appeared to be at levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. Participants generally agreed that downside risks to the outlook for economic activity had risen materially since their May meeting, particularly those associated with on- going trade negotiations and slowing economic growth abroad. Other downside risks cited by several partici- pants included the possibility that federal budget negoti- ations could result in a sharp reduction in government spending or that negotiations to raise the federal debt limit could be prolonged. A couple of participants ob- served that an economic deterioration in the United States, if it occurred, might be amplified by significant debt burdens for many firms. A few participants re- marked that an upside risk to the outlook for economic activity and inflation included a scenario in which trade negotiations were resolved favorably and business senti- ment rebounded sharply. In their discussion of financial developments, partici- pants observed that the increase in uncertainty sur- rounding the global outlook had affected risk sentiment in financial markets. While overall financial conditions remained supportive of growth, those conditions ap- peared to be premised importantly on expectations that the Federal Reserve would ease policy in the near term to help offset the drag on economic growth stemming from uncertainties about the global outlook and other downside risks. Participants also discussed the decline in yields on longer-term Treasury securities in recent months. Many participants noted that the spread be- tween the 10-year and 3-month Treasury yields was now negative, and several noted that their assessment of the risk of a slowing in the economic expansion had in- creased based on either the shape of the yield curve or other financial and economic indicators. A few partici- pants pointed to the growth in debt issuance by nonfi- nancial corporations and still generally high asset valua- tions as developments that warranted continued moni- toring. In their discussion of monetary policy decisions at this meeting, participants noted that, under their baseline outlook, the labor market was likely to remain strong with economic activity growing at a moderate pace. However, they judged that the risks and uncertainties surrounding their outlooks, particularly those related to the global economic outlook, had intensified in recent weeks. Moreover, inflation continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent objective; similarly, inflation for items other than food and energy had remained below 2 percent as well. In addition, some readings on infla- tion expectations had been low. The increase in risks and uncertainties surrounding the outlook was quite re- cent and nearly all participants agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent at this meeting. However, they noted that it would be important to mon- itor the implications of incoming information and global economic developments for the U.S. economic outlook. A couple of participants favored a cut in the target range at this meeting, judging that a prolonged period with in- flation running below 2 percent warranted a more ac- commodative policy response to firmly center inflation and inflation expectations around the Committee’s sym- metric 2 percent objective. With regard to the outlook for monetary policy beyond this meeting, nearly all participants had revised down their assessment of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate over the projection period in their SEP sub- missions, and some had marked down their estimates of the longer-run normal level of the funds rate as well. Many participants indicated that the case for somewhat more accommodative policy had strengthened. Partici- pants widely noted that the global developments that led to the heightened uncertainties about the economic out- look were quite recent. Many judged additional mone- tary policy accommodation would be warranted in the near term should these recent developments prove to be sustained and continue to weigh on the economic out- look. Several others noted that additional monetary pol- Minutes of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ icy accommodation could well be appropriate if incom- ing information showed further deterioration in the out- look. Participants stated a variety of reasons that would call for a lower path of the federal funds rate. Several participants noted that a near-term cut in the target range for the federal funds rate could help cushion the effects of possible future adverse shocks to the economy and, hence, was appropriate policy from a risk-management perspective. Some participants also noted that the con- tinued shortfall in inflation risked a softening of inflation expectations that could slow the sustained return of in- flation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Several participants pointed out that they had revised down their estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemploy- ment and, as a result, saw a smaller upward contribution to inflation pressures from tight resource utilization than they had earlier. A few participants were concerned that inflation expectations had already moved below levels consistent with the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective and that it was important to provide additional accommodation in the near term to bolster inflation ex- pectations. A few participants judged that allowing in- flation to run above 2 percent for some time could help strengthen the credibility of the Committee’s commit- ment to its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. Some participants suggested that although they now judged that the appropriate path of the federal funds rate would follow a flatter trajectory than they had previously assumed, there was not yet a strong case for a rate cut from current levels. They preferred to gather more in- formation on the trajectory of the economy before con- cluding that a change in policy stance is warranted. A few participants expressed the view that with the econ- omy still in a favorable position in terms of the dual mandate, an easing of policy in an attempt to increase inflation a few tenths of a percentage point risked over- heating the labor markets and fueling financial imbal- ances. Several participants observed that the trimmed mean measure of PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas had stayed near 2 per- cent recently, underscoring the view that the recent low readings on inflation will prove transitory. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members noted the significant increase in risks and uncertainties attending the economic outlook. There were signs of weakness in U.S. business spending, and foreign economic data were generally disappointing, raising concerns about the strength of global economic growth. While strong labor markets and rising incomes continued to support the outlook for consumer spend- ing, uncertainties and risks regarding the global outlook appeared to be contributing to a deterioration in risk sentiment in financial markets and a decline in business confidence that pointed to a weaker outlook for business investment in the United States. Inflation pressures re- mained muted and some readings on inflation expecta- tions were at low levels. Although nearly all members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent at this meeting, they generally agreed that risks and uncertainties surrounding the eco- nomic outlook had intensified and many judged that ad- ditional policy accommodation would be warranted if they continued to weigh on the economic outlook. One member preferred to lower the target range for the fed- eral funds rate by 25 basis points at this meeting, stating that the Committee should ease policy at this meeting to re-center inflation and inflation expectations at the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. Members agreed that in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and ex- pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum-employment and symmetric 2 percent infla- tion objectives. They reiterated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. More generally, members noted that decisions regarding near-term adjustments of the stance of monetary policy would appropriately remain dependent on the implica- tions of incoming information for the economic out- look. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed to several adjustments in the description of the economic situation, including a revision in the descrip- tion of market-based measures of inflation compensa- tion to recognize the recent fall in inflation compensa- tion. The Committee retained the characterization of the most likely outcomes as “sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective” but added a clause to emphasize that uncertain- ties about this outlook had increased. In describing the monetary policy outlook, members agreed to remove the “patient” language and to emphasize instead that, in light of these uncertainties and muted inflation pressures, the Committee would closely monitor the implications of in- coming information for the economic outlook and would act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in ac- cordance with the following domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective June 20, 2019, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2¼ to 2½ percent, including overnight re- verse repurchase operations (and reverse repur- chase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate week- end, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 2.25 percent, in amounts lim- ited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing during each cal- endar month that exceeds $15 billion, and to in agency mortgage- continue reinvesting backed securities the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed secu- rities received during each calendar month that exceeds $20 billion. Small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are ac- ceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in May indicates that the labor market remains strong and that eco- nomic activity is rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has re- mained low. Although growth of household spending appears to have picked up from earlier in the year, indicators of business fixed invest- ment have been soft. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are running below 2 per- cent. Market-based measures of inflation com- pensation have declined; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. The Committee continues to view sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective as the most likely outcomes, but uncer- tainties about this outlook have increased. In light of these uncertainties and muted inflation pressures, the Committee will closely monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropri- ate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 per- cent objective. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Randal K. Quarles, and Eric Rosengren. Voting against this action: James Bullard. Mr. Bullard dissented because he believed that the cur- rent stance of monetary policy could be better posi- tioned to foster progress toward the Committee’s statu- tory objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Particularly in light of persistent low readings on inflation and from indicators of inflation expectations Minutes of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ along with the risks to the U.S. outlook associated with global economic developments, he noted that a policy rate reduction at the current meeting would help re-cen- ter inflation and inflation expectations at levels con- sistent with the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent infla- tion objective and simultaneously provide some insur- ance against unexpected developments that could slow U.S. economic growth. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un- changed at 2.35 percent and voted unanimously to ap- prove establishment of the primary credit rate at the ex- isting level of 3.00 percent, effective June 20, 2019. Update from Subcommittee on Communications Governor Clarida provided a brief update on the work of the subcommittee on communications. The Fed Lis- tens conferences conducted to date were viewed as suc- cessful in identifying many important issues for the stra- tegic review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and com- munications. Additional Fed Listens events were planned over the remainder of the year. The Committee was likely to begin internal deliberations on aspects of the strategic review over coming FOMC meetings. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 30–31, 2019. The meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on June 19, 2019. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on May 21, 2019, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on April 30–May 1, 2019. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Summary of Economic Projections slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2021. Core PCE price inflation was also expected to in- crease over the projection period, rising to 2.0 percent in 2021. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. As shown in figure 2, just over half of the participants expected that the evolution of the economy, relative to their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, would likely warrant keeping the federal funds rate at or slightly above its current level through the end of 2019; almost half projected that a lower level for the federal funds rate would be appropriate by year-end. The median of participants’ assessments of the appro- priate level of the federal funds rate at the end of the projection period was close to the median of their as- sessments of the longer-run federal funds rate level. Nearly all participants lowered their projections for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate, relative to March, at some point in the forecast period. The medi- ans for the federal funds rate for 2020 and 2021 were 50 basis points and 25 basis points lower than in March, respectively. The median of projections for the long-run normal level of the federal funds rate was 25 basis points lower than in the March projections. Most participants regarded the uncertainties around their forecasts for GDP growth, total inflation, and core inflation as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years. About half of the participants viewed the level of uncertainty around their unemployment rate projec- tions as being similar to the average of the past 20 years, and about the same number viewed uncertainty as higher. Participants’ assessments of risks to their out- looks for output growth and the unemployment rate shifted notably relative to their assessments in March. As a result, most participants viewed the risks for GDP growth as weighted to the downside and for the unem- ployment rate as weighted to the upside. About half of participants viewed the risks to inflation as being broadly balanced, with a similar number viewing inflation risks as being weighted to the downside. In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- tee (FOMC) meeting held on June 18–19, 2019, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2019 to 2021 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—includ- ing a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to af- fect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the ab- sence of further shocks to the economy.1 “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster out- comes for economic activity and inflation that best sat- isfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Participants who submitted longer-run projections gen- erally expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth of real GDP in 2019 would run at or somewhat above their individual estimates of its longer-run rate. Thereafter, almost all participants expected real GDP growth to edge down, with the vast majority of partici- pants projecting growth in 2021 to be at or below their estimates of its longer-run rate. All participants who submitted longer-run projections continued to expect that the unemployment rate would run at or below their estimates of its longer-run level through 2021. Com- pared with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from March 2019, most participants revised down slightly their projections for the unemployment rate from 2019 through 2021. All participants marked down somewhat their projections for 2019 for total inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), and almost all did so for their projections for core inflation. All participants projected that inflation would increase in 2020, from 2019, and a majority ex- pected another slight increase in 2021. The vast majority of participants expected that inflation would be at or 1 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ , s t n e d i s e r p k n a B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F d n a s r e b m e m d r a o B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F f o s n o i t c e j o r p c i m o n o c E . 1 e l b a T 9 1 0 2 e n u J , y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p f o s t n e m s s e s s a l a u d i v i d n i r i e h t r e d n u r e g n o L n u r 3 e g n a R 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 r e g n o L n u r 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 5 . 1 2 . 2 – 5 . 1 3 . 2 – 5 . 1 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 4 . 2 – 0 . 2 4 . 2 – 6 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 5 . 4 – 6 . 3 6 . 4 – 0 . 4 2 . 4 – 3 . 3 2 . 4 – 4 . 3 0 . 4 – 3 . 3 1 . 4 – 4 . 3 8 . 3 – 5 . 3 0 . 4 – 5 . 3 4 . 4 – 0 . 4 5 . 4 – 1 . 4 0 . 4 – 6 . 3 1 . 4 – 7 . 3 9 . 3 – 5 . 3 9 . 3 – 6 . 3 7 . 3 – 6 . 3 8 . 3 – 6 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 7 . 1 – 4 . 1 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 6 . 1 – 5 . 1 9 . 1 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 8 . 1 – 4 . 1 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 8 . 1 – 7 . 1 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 n u r 9 . 1 9 . 1 2 . 4 3 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 2 8 . 1 8 . 1 8 . 3 9 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 9 . 1 7 . 3 8 . 3 9 . 1 0 . 2 9 . 1 0 . 2 1 . 2 1 . 2 6 . 3 7 . 3 5 . 1 8 . 1 8 . 1 0 . 2 n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M P D G l a e r n i e g n a h C n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n U n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M 4 n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o C h t a p y c i l o p e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r P : o m e M 2 y c n e d n e t l a r t n e C 1 n a i d e M 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 r e g n o L 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 e l b a i r a V t n e c r e P 3 . 3 – 4 . 2 5 . 3 – 5 . 2 1 . 3 – 9 . 1 6 . 3 – 4 . 2 1 . 3 – 9 . 1 4 . 3 – 4 . 2 6 . 2 – 9 . 1 9 . 2 – 4 . 2 0 . 3 – 5 . 2 0 . 3 – 5 . 2 6 . 2 – 9 . 1 9 . 2 – 4 . 2 4 . 2 – 9 . 1 9 . 2 – 4 . 2 4 . 2 – 9 . 1 6 . 2 – 4 . 2 5 . 2 8 . 2 4 . 2 6 . 2 1 . 2 6 . 2 4 . 2 4 . 2 n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e F e h t m o r f s e g n a h c t n e c r e p e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i f o s e r u s a e m h t o b r o f s n o i t c e j o r p d n a ) P D G ( t c u d o r p c i t s e m o d s s o r g l a e r n i e g n a h c f o s n o i t c e j o r P : e t o N e g n a h c f o s e t a r e g a t n e c r e p e h t e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c d n a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t o t r a e y s u o i v e r p e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f r o f e r a s n o i t c e j o r P . y g r e n e d n a d o o f g n i d u l c x e E C P r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t d n a ) E C P ( s e r u t i d n e p x e n o i t p m u s n o c l a n o s r e p r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t , y l e v i t c e p s e r , n i s n o i t c e j o r p s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a E . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t n i e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u n a i l i v i c e g a r e v a e h t r o f e r a e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t h c a e h c i h w o t e t a r e h t f o t n e m s s e s s a s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a e t n e s e r p e r s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a f o t n e m s s e s s a r e h r o s i h n o d e s a b e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p e h T . y m o n o c e e h t o t s k c o h s r e h t r u f f o e c n e s b a e h t n i d n a y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a r e d n u e g r e v n o c o t d e t c e p x e e b d l u o w e l b a i r a v t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t r o e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f e g n a r t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t f o t n i o p d i m e h t f o e u l a v e h t e r a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e d a m e r e w s n o i t c e j o r p h c r a M e h T . n u r r e g n o l e h t r e v o r o r a e y r a d n e l a c d e ﬁ i c e p s e h t f o d n e e h t t a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f l e v e l l a e r n i e g n a h c e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o l t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n O . 9 1 0 2 , 0 2 – 9 1 h c r a M n o e e t t i m m o C t e k r a M n e p O l a r e d e F e h t f o g n i t e e m e h t h c u s t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n o d n a , g n i t e e m , 9 1 0 2 , 0 2 – 9 1 h c r a M e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o , e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t , P D G . g n i t e e m , 9 1 0 2 , 9 1 – 8 1 e n u J e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i s n o i t c e j o r p s n o i t c e j o r p f o r e b m u n e h t n e h W . t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f d e g n a r r a e r a s n o i t c e j o r p e h t n e h w n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , d o i r e p h c a e r o F . 1 . r a e y t a h t n i e l b a i r a v t a h t r o f , t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f , s n o i t c e j o r p ’ s t n a p i c i t r a p l l a s e d u l c n i r a e y n e v i g a n i e l b a i r a v a r o f e g n a r . r a e y h c a e n i e l b a i r a v h c a e r o f s n o i t c e j o r p t s e w o l e e r h t d n a t s e h g i h e e r h t e h t s e d u l c x e y c n e d n e t l a r t n e c e h T e h T . d e t c e l l o c t o n e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . 2 . 3 . 4 . s n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m o w t e h t f o e g a r e v a e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , n e v e s i Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2019–21 and over the longer run Percent Change in real GDP Median of projections Central tendency of projections Range of projections Actual 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Percent Unemployment rate 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Percent PCE inflation 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Percent Core PCE inflation 3 2 1 7 6 5 4 3 3 2 1 3 2 1 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate Percent 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 2019 2020 2021 Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par- ticipant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The Outlook for Real GDP Growth and Unemploy- ment As shown in table 1, the median of participants’ projec- tions for the growth rate of real GDP in 2019, condi- tional on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, was 2.1 percent, a bit above the median estimate of its longer-run rate of 1.9 percent. Almost all participants continued to expect GDP growth to slow over the projection period, with the median projection at 2.0 percent in 2020 and at 1.8 percent in 2021. Rela- tive to the March SEP, the medians of the projections for real GDP growth in 2019, 2020, 2021, and the longer run were little changed. The median of projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2019 was 3.6 percent, about ½ per- centage point below the median assessment of its longer- run level of 4.2 percent. The medians of projections for 2020 and 2021 were 3.7 percent and 3.8 percent, respec- tively. These median unemployment rates, along with the median for the unemployment rate in the longer run, were a little lower than those from the March SEP. As was the case in March, almost all participants who sub- mitted longer-run projections expected that the unem- ployment rate in 2021 would be below their estimates of its longer-run level. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- ployment rate from 2019 to 2021 and in the longer run. The distribution of individual projections for real GDP growth for 2019 through 2021 all shifted up modestly relative to that in the March SEP. The distribution for the longer-run growth rate was little changed. The dis- tributions of individual projections for the unemploy- ment rate in 2019 and 2020 moved lower relative to those in March, and the distribution in 2021 edged down as well. Meanwhile, the distribution for the longer-run unemployment rate shifted down a touch. The Outlook for Inflation As shown in table 1, the median of projections for total PCE price inflation was 1.5 percent in 2019, notably lower than in the March SEP, while the median for 2020, at 1.9 percent, was a touch lower than in March. The median for total inflation for 2021 was unchanged from March at 2.0 percent. The medians of projections for core PCE price inflation for 2019 and 2020 were 1.8 per- cent and 1.9 percent, respectively, both a little lower rel- ative to the March SEP. The median for 2021 was 2.0 percent, unchanged from the March SEP. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri- butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in- flation. The distributions of projections for total PCE price inflation and core PCE price inflation in 2019 shifted down notably from the March SEP, while those for 2020 and 2021 changed more modestly. Beyond the current year, for which projections also reflect data in hand, almost all participants expected total and core PCE price inflation to be between 1.9 and 2.2 percent. Appropriate Monetary Policy Figure 3.E shows distributions of participants’ judg- ments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2019 to 2021 and over the longer run. On the whole, the distributions for 2019 through 2021 shifted toward lower values. Almost all participants viewed the appropriate levels of the federal funds rate at the end of 2019, 2020, and 2021 as lower than those that they deemed appropriate in March. Nearly all partici- pants lowered their projections for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate, relative to March, at some point in the projection period, and none raised their projec- tions for the federal funds rate for any year. Compared with the projections prepared for the March SEP, the median federal funds rate was 50 basis points lower in 2020, 25 basis points lower in 2021, and 25 basis points lower in the longer-run. While the median of federal funds rate projections at the end of 2019 remained at 2.38 percent, almost half of participants projected an ap- propriate level of the target range for the federal funds rate at the end of 2019 that was 25 basis points or 50 ba- sis points lower than at present. In subsequent years, the medians of the projections were 2.13 percent at the end of 2020 and 2.38 percent at the end of 2021, slightly lower than the median of the longer-run projections of the federal funds rate of 2.50 percent. Muted inflation pressures and concerns about declining inflation expec- tations, trade developments, and foreign economic growth, as well as weaker business fixed investment, were cited as factors contributing to the downward revi- sions in participants’ assessments of the appropriate path for the policy rate. Uncertainty and Risks In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast errors of various private and government forecasts over the past 20 years—for real GDP growth, the unemployment Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2019–21 and over the longer run 2019 June projections March projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 Percent range 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 Number of participants 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 Percent range 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2020 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 Percent range 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 Percent range 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2019–21 and over the longer run 2019 June projections March projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2020 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 Percent range 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2019–21 and over the longer run 2019 June projections March projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Number of participants 2020 2021 Longer run 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂation, 2019–21 2019 June projections March projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Number of participants 2020 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 Percent range 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2019–21 and over the longer run 2019 June projections March projections Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Number of participants Longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.88 2.12 2.13 2.37 2.38 2.62 2.63 2.87 2.88 3.12 3.13 3.37 3.38 3.62 Percent range 3.63 3.87 3.88 4.12 4.13 4.37 4.38 4.62 4.63 4.87 4.88 5.12 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Variable Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . Total consumer prices2 . . . . . 2019 ±1.3 ±0.4 ±0.7 Short-term interest rates3 . . . . ±0.7 2020 ±1.8 ±1.2 ±1.0 ±1.9 2021 ±2.0 ±1.8 ±1.0 ±2.2 NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1999 through 2018 that were re- leased in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using His- torical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx. doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are represented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts display the SEP medians for the three variables sur- rounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the de- gree of uncertainty attending these projections is similar to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 percent probability of being within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of uncer- tainty is substantial and generally increases as the fore- cast horizon lengthens. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- rounding their individual economic projections are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The vast majority of participants continued to view the uncertainty around their projections for inflation as broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years; most also viewed uncertainty around their projections for GDP growth as similar to the average of the past 20 years. Views on uncertainty around unemployment rate projections were roughly evenly distributed between those who saw similar levels of uncertainty relative to the historical average and those who saw higher uncer- tainty.2 Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric around the median projections, they do not reflect any asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess- ments of the balance of risks to their current economic projections are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig- ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The balance of risks to the pro- jection for real GDP growth shifted lower, with 14 par- ticipants assessing the risks as weighted to the downside, 3 assessing them to be broadly balanced, and no partici- pant seeing them as weighted to the upside. Similarly, the balance of risks to the projection for the unemploy- ment rate moved higher, with 12 participants judging the risks to the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside and 5 participants viewing the risks as broadly balanced. In addition, the balance of risks to the inflation projec- tions shifted down relative to March. Six more partici- pants than in March saw the risks to the inflation projec- tions as weighted to the downside, and no participant judged the risks as weighted to the upside. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, trade developments, concerns about global economic growth, and weaker business fixed investment were mentioned by participants as sources of uncertainty or downside risk to the U.S. eco- nomic growth outlook. For the inflation outlook, the effect of trade developments was cited as a source of up- side risk, while the possibility that inflation expectations could be drifting below levels consistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective or the potential for a stronger dollar or weaker domestic demand to put downward pressure on inflation were viewed as down- side risks. A number of participants mentioned that their assessments of risks remained roughly balanced in part because the downward revisions to their appropri- ate path for the federal funds rate were offsetting factors that would otherwise contribute to asymmetric risks. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the federal funds rate in response to actual and prospective devel- opments over time in key economic variables such as real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation, 2 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici- pants’ projections. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.A. Uncertainty and risks in projections of GDP growth Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Change in real GDP Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 4 3 2 1 0 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about GDP growth June projections March projections Risks to GDP growth June projections March projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.B. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the unemployment rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Unemployment rate Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate June projections March projections June projections March projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.C. Uncertainty and risks in projections of PCE inﬂation Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors PCE inflation Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 3 2 1 0 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about PCE inflation June projections March projections Risks to PCE inflation June projections March projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about core PCE inflation June projections March projections Risks to core PCE inflation June projections March projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the fed- eral funds rate importantly reflects the uncertainties about the paths for these economic variables along with other factors. Figure 5 provides a graphical representa- tion of this uncertainty, plotting the SEP median for the federal funds rate surrounded by confidence intervals derived from the results presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial and increases for longer horizons. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 15_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 5. Uncertainty in projections of the federal funds rate Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors Federal funds rate Midpoint of target range Median of projections 70% confidence interval* Actual 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Percent 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com- mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The conﬁdence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to oﬀset the eﬀects of shocks to the economy. The conﬁdence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero—the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The conﬁdence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent conﬁdence interval if the conﬁdence interval has been truncated at zero. Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- tial costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.7 to 4.3 percent in the current year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the second year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence inter- vals for overall inflation would be 1.3 to 2.7 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projec- tion might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmet- rically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig- ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par- ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summa- rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone- tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac- tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri- ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 18–19, 2019Page 17_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee July 30–31, 2019 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 30, 2019, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, July 31, 2019, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Richard H. Clarida Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Randal K. Quarles Eric Rosengren Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Rochelle M. Edge, Beverly Hirtle, Christopher J. Waller, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager pro tem, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback,2 Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Eric Belsky,3 Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors; Matthew J. Eichner,4 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Margie Shanks,5 Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Arthur Lindo, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Trevor A. Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian M. Doyle,6 Wendy E. Dunn, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; David E. Lebow and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of economic developments and outlook. 3 Attended the discussion of the review of monetary policy framework. 4 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. 5 Attended the discussion of economic developments and out- look through discussion of monetary policy. 6 Attended Tuesday session only. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Don Kim, Edward Nelson, and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; S. Wayne Passmore, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Marnie Gillis DeBoer and Min Wei, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Elizabeth Klee, Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; John J. Stevens, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Norman J. Morin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Andrea Raffo, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,4 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Etienne Gagnon, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Marc Giannoni,3 Spencer Krane, and Paula Tkac,3 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Chicago, and Atlanta, respectively Robert G. Valletta, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Terry Fitzgerald, Christopher J. Neely,3 and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis, St. Louis, and New York, respectively Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Karel Mertens, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Joseph G. Haubrich, Senior Economic and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Brent Bundick, Research and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Affairs, Board of Governors Vasco Curdia,3 Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Alyssa G. Anderson, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Dario Caldara3 and Albert Queralto,3 Principal Economists, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Isabel Cairó,3 Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ellen J. Bromagen, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago David Altig, Michael Dotsey, and Jeffrey Fuhrer, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Philadelphia, and Boston, respectively Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices Committee participants began their discussions related to the ongoing review of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Staff briefings provided a retrospective on the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy actions since the financial cri- sis, together with background and analysis regarding some key issues. In its policy response during the reces- sion and the subsequent economic recovery, the Com- mittee lowered the federal funds rate to its effective lower bound (ELB) and provided additional monetary policy accommodation through both forward guidance about the expected path of the policy rate and balance sheet policy. These actions eased financial conditions and provided substantial support to economic activity; they therefore figured importantly in helping promote the recovery in the labor market and in preventing infla- tion from falling substantially below the Committee’s objective. The presentation noted, however, that over the past several years, inflation had tended to run mod- estly below the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 per- cent, while some indicators of longer-run inflation ex- pectations currently stood at low levels. The staff also provided results from model simulations that illustrated Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ possible challenges to the achievement of the Commit- tee’s dual-mandate goals over the medium term. These challenges included the proximity of the policy rate to the ELB, imprecise knowledge about the neutral value of the policy rate and the longer-run normal level of the unemployment rate, the diminished response of infla- tion to resource utilization, and uncertainty about the re- lationship between inflation expectations and inflation outcomes. In their discussion, participants welcomed the review of the monetary policy framework. They noted that the in- clusion of feedback from the public as part of the review, via the Fed Listens events, had improved the transparency of the review process, enhanced the Federal Reserve’s public accountability, and provided insights into the pos- itive implications of strong labor markets and high rates of employment for various communities. Furthermore, participants agreed that the review was timely and war- ranted, in light of the use over the past decade of new policy tools and the emergence of changes in the struc- ture and operation of the U.S. economy. These changes included the long period during which the federal funds rate was at the ELB, the probable recurrence of ELB episodes if the neutral level of the policy rate remains at historically low levels, and the challenges that policymak- ers face in influencing inflation and inflation expecta- tions when the response of inflation to resource utiliza- tion has diminished. Participants generally agreed that the Committee’s consideration of possible modifications to its policy strategy, tools, and communication practices would take some time and that the process would be careful, deliberate, and patient. With regard to the current monetary policy framework, participants agreed that this framework had served the Committee and the U.S. economy well over the past dec- ade. They judged that forward guidance and balance sheet actions had provided policy accommodation dur- ing the ELB period and had supported economic activity and a return to strong labor market conditions while also bringing inflation closer to the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent than would otherwise have been the case. In addition, participants noted that the Commit- tee’s balanced approach to promoting its dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability had facili- tated Committee policy actions aimed at supporting the labor market and economic activity even during times when the provision of accommodation was potentially associated with the risk of inflation running persistently above 2 percent. Participants further observed that such inflation risks—along with several of the other perceived risks of providing substantial accommodation through nontraditional policy tools, including possible adverse implications for financial stability—had not been real- ized. In particular, a number of participants commented that, as many of the potential costs of the Committee’s asset purchases had failed to materialize, the Federal Re- serve might have been able to make use of balance sheet tools even more aggressively over the past decade in providing appropriate levels of accommodation. How- ever, several participants remarked that considerable un- certainties remained about the costs and efficacy of asset purchases, and a couple of participants suggested that, taking account of the uncertainties and the perceived constraints facing policymakers in the years following the recession, the Committee’s decisions on the amount of policy accommodation to provide through asset pur- chases had been appropriate. In their discussion of policy tools, participants noted that the experience acquired by the Committee with the use of forward guidance and asset purchases has led to an improved understanding of how these tools operate; as a result, the Committee could proceed more confi- dently and preemptively in using these tools in the future if economic circumstances warranted. Participants dis- cussed the extent to which forward guidance and balance sheet actions could substitute for reductions in the pol- icy rate when the policy rate is constrained by the ELB. Overall, participants judged that the Federal Reserve’s ability to provide monetary policy accommodation at the ELB through the use of forward guidance and balance sheet tools, while helpful in mitigating the effects of the constraint on monetary policy arising from the lower bound, did not eliminate the risk of protracted periods in which the ELB hinders the conduct of policy. If pol- icymakers are not able to provide sufficient accommo- dation at the ELB through the use of forward guidance or balance sheet actions, the constraints posed by the ELB could be an impediment to the attainment of the Federal Reserve’s dual-mandate objectives over time and put at risk the anchoring of inflation expectations at the Committee’s longer-run inflation objective. Participants looked forward to a detailed discussion over coming meetings of alternative strategies for monetary policy. Some participants offered remarks on general features of some of the monetary policy strategies that they would be discussing and on the relationship be- tween those strategies and the current framework. A few of the options mentioned were “makeup strategies,” in which the realization of inflation below the 2 percent objective would give rise to policy actions designed to deliver inflation above the objective for a time. In prin- _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 30–31, 2019Page 3 ciple, such makeup strategies could be designed to pro- mote a 2 percent inflation rate, on average, over some period. In such circumstances, market expectations that the central bank would seek to “make up” inflation shortfalls following periods during which the ELB was binding could help ease overall financial conditions and thus help support economic activity during ELB epi- sodes. However, many participants noted that the ben- efits of makeup strategies in supporting economic activ- ity and stabilizing inflation depended heavily on the pri- vate sector’s understanding of those strategies and con- fidence that future policymakers would take actions con- sistent with those strategies. A few participants sug- gested that an alternative means of delivering average in- flation equal to the Committee’s longer-run objective might involve aiming for inflation somewhat in excess of 2 percent when the policy rate was away from the ELB, recognizing that inflation would tend to move lower when the policy rate was constrained by the ELB. Another possibility might be for the Committee to ex- press the inflation goal as a range centered on 2 percent and aim to achieve inflation outcomes in the upper end of the range in periods when resource utilization was high. A couple of participants noted that an adoption of a target range would be consistent with the practice of some other central banks. A few other participants sug- gested that the adoption of a range could convey a mes- sage that small deviations of inflation from 2 percent were unlikely to give rise to sizable policy responses. A couple of participants expressed concern that if policy- makers regularly failed to respond appropriately to per- sistent, relatively small shortfalls of inflation below the 2 percent longer-run objective, inflation expectations and average observed inflation could drift below that ob- jective. Participants also discussed the Committee’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. Participants noted that this statement had been helpful in articulating and clarifying the Federal Reserve’s ap- proach to monetary policy. The Committee first re- leased this document in January 2012 and had renewed it, with a few modifications, every year since then. On the basis of the monetary policy and economic experi- ence of the past decade, participants cited a number of topics that they would likely discuss in detail in their de- liberations during the review and that might motivate possible modifications to the statement. These topics included the conduct of monetary policy in the presence of the ELB constraint, the role of inflation expectations in monetary policy, the best means of conveying the Committee’s balanced approach to monetary policy and the symmetry of its inflation goal, the relationship be- tween the Committee’s strategy and its decisions about the settings of its policy tools, the implications of the low value of the neutral policy rate and of uncertainty about the values of the neutral policy rate and the longer-run normal rate of unemployment, the potential benefits and costs of unemployment running below its longer-run normal rate in conditions of muted inflation pressures, and the time frame over which policymakers aimed to achieve their dual-mandate goals. A couple of partici- pants emphasized the availability to policymakers of other communication tools through which the Commit- tee could elaborate on its policy strategy and the chal- lenges that monetary policy faced in the current environ- ment, while also indicating that the Committee retains flexibility and optionality to achieve its objectives. Par- ticipants highlighted the importance of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in conveying participants’ modal outlooks, with several participants suggesting that modifications to the SEP’s format might enhance policy communications. Participants also commented on the importance of considering the connections between monetary policy and financial stability. Participants expected that, at upcoming meetings, they would continue their deliberations on the review of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. These additional discussions would consider various topics, such as alternative policy strategies, options for enhanced use of existing monetary policy tools, possible additions to the policy toolkit, po- tential changes to communication practices, the relation- ship between monetary policy and financial stability, and the distributional effects of monetary policy. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager pro tem discussed developments in finan- cial markets over the intermeeting period. Regarding market participants’ views about the July FOMC meet- ing, nearly all respondents from the July Open Market Desk surveys of dealers and market participants ex- pected a 25 basis point cut in the target range for the federal funds rate, a substantial shift from the June sur- veys when a significant majority had a modal forecast for no change. Survey responses also suggested that expec- tations had coalesced around a modal forecast for a total of two 25 basis point cuts in the target range in 2019 and no change thereafter through year-end 2021. Regarding balance sheet policy, survey respondents that expected a rate cut at this meeting were almost evenly split on whether the Committee would also choose to end bal- ance runoff immediately after the meeting or to maintain Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the existing plan to halt runoff at the end of September. Market participants generally judged that a two-month change in the timing of the end of the balance sheet run- off would have only a small effect on the path of the balance sheet and thus very little, if any, economic effect. Expectations for near-term domestic policy easing had occurred against the backdrop of a global shift toward more accommodative monetary policy. Several central banks had eased policy over the past month and a num- ber of others shifted to an easing bias. Market partici- pants were particularly attentive to a statement after the European Central Bank’s Governing Council meeting that was perceived as affirming expectations for further easing and additional asset purchases. These changes to the policy outlook in the United States and across a num- ber of countries appeared to play an important role in supporting financial conditions and offsetting some of the drag on growth from trade tensions and other risks. Somewhat reduced concern among market participants about important risks to the global outlook also ap- peared to support risk asset prices. Following the G-20 (Group of Twenty) meeting in late June, fewer Desk contacts and respondents to the Desk surveys expected a significant escalation of U.S.-China trade tensions. In addition, investor sentiment was bolstered by news that the Administration and Congress had reached a budget and debt ceiling agreement that, if passed, would remove another source of risk later this year. That said, contacts recognized that some potentially sizeable downside risks remained. Many survey respondents still viewed U.S.- China trade risks as skewed to the downside, and many Desk contacts judged that the risks of a “no-deal” Brexit had increased. The manager pro tem next discussed developments in money markets and open market operations. The spreads of the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) and the median Eurodollar rate relative to the interest on ex- cess reserves (IOER) rate had increased some and be- come more variable over recent months, with a notable pickup in daily changes in these spreads since late March. Moreover, the range of rates in unsecured markets each day had widened. Market participants pointed to pres- sures in repurchase agreement (repo) markets as one fac- tor contributing to the uptick in volatility in unsecured rates. These pressures, in turn, seemed to stem partly from elevated dealer inventories of Treasury securities and dealers’ associated financing needs. Market partici- pants also pointed to lower reserve balances as a factor affecting rates in unsecured money market rates. Over the intermeeting period, the level of reserves was little changed on net; however, some market participants noted the association between the gradual increase in un- secured rates relative to the IOER rate over recent months and the declining level of reserves since System Open Market Account (SOMA) redemptions began. The level of reserves was expected to decline appreciably over coming months, partly reflecting an anticipated siz- able increase in the Treasury’s balance at the Federal Re- serve following the agreement on the federal budget and debt ceiling. The manager pro tem updated the Committee on Desk plans to resume CUSIP (Committee on Uniform Secu- rities Identification Procedures) aggregation of SOMA holdings of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac agency mort- gage-backed securities (MBS) to reduce administrative costs and operational complexity, and the Desk expects to release a statement in August with details on the ag- gregation strategy. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available for the July 30–31 meeting in- dicated that labor market conditions remained strong and that real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a moderate rate in the second quarter. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption ex- penditures (PCE), was below 2 percent in June. Survey- based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a solid rate, on average, in recent months, supported by a brisk gain in June. The unemployment rate edged up to 3.7 percent in June but was still at a historically low level. The labor force participation rate also moved up some- what but was close to its average over the previous few years, and the employment-to-population ratio stayed flat. The unemployment rates for African Americans and Asians declined in June, the rate for whites was un- changed, and the rate for Hispanics edged up; the unem- ployment rate for each group was below its level at the end of the previous economic expansion, though persis- tent differentials between these rates remained. The share of workers employed part time for economic rea- sons in June continued to be below the lows reached in late 2007. The rate of private-sector job openings held steady in May, while the rate of quits edged down but _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 30–31, 2019Page 5 was still at a high level; the four-week moving average of initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits through mid-July was near historically low levels. Aver- age hourly earnings for all employees rose 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending in June, somewhat faster than a year earlier. The employment cost index for pri- vate-sector workers increased 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in June, the same as a year earlier. (Data on compensation per hour that reflected the re- cent annual update of the national income and product accounts by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) were not available at the time of the meeting.) Total consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in June. This increase was slower than a year earlier, as core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) moved down to 1.6 percent, consumer food price inflation remained be- low core inflation, and consumer energy prices declined. The average monthly change in the core PCE price index during the second quarter was faster than in the first quarter, suggesting that some of the soft inflation read- ings early in the year were transitory. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas remained at or near 2 percent in recent months. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 1.6 percent over the 12 months ending in June, while core CPI inflation was 2.1 percent. Recent survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expecta- tions were little changed on balance. The preliminary July reading from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers moved back up after dipping in June but was still at a relatively low level; the measures from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants were little changed. Real consumer expenditures rose briskly in the second quarter after a sluggish gain in the first quarter, sup- ported in part by a robust pace of light motor vehicle sales in May and June. However, real PCE rose more slowly in June than in the first five months of the year, suggesting some deceleration in consumer spending go- ing into the third quarter. Key factors that influence consumer spending—including a low unemployment rate, further gains in real disposable income, and ele- vated measures of households’ net worth—were sup- portive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. In addition, the preliminary July reading on the Michigan survey measure of consumer sentiment remained at an upbeat level. Real residential investment declined again in the second quarter. Although starts of new single-family homes rose in June, the average in the second quarter was lower than in the first quarter; starts of multifamily units fell back in June but rose for the second quarter as a whole. Building permit issuance for new single-family homes— which tends to be a good indicator of the underlying trend in construction of such homes—was at roughly the same level in June as its first-quarter average. On net in May and June, sales of new homes declined, while sales of existing homes rose. Real nonresidential private fixed investment edged down in the second quarter, as a decline in expenditures on nonresidential structures more than offset an increase in expenditures for business equipment and intellectual property. Forward-looking indicators of fixed invest- ment were mixed. Orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased in June, and some measures of business sentiment improved. However, analysts’ ex- pectations of firms’ longer-term profit growth remained soft, trade policy concerns appeared to be weighing on investment, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to decrease in recent weeks. Industrial production (IP) was unchanged in June, as a decrease in the output of utilities offset increases in the output of manufacturers and mines. For the second quarter as a whole, both total IP and manufacturing out- put declined, while mining output rose notably, sup- ported by a strong gain in crude oil extraction. Au- tomakers’ assembly schedules suggested that production of light motor vehicles would move up somewhat in the third quarter. However, new orders indexes from na- tional and regional manufacturing surveys pointed to- ward continued softness in manufacturing production in coming months. Total real government purchases rose solidly in the sec- ond quarter. Federal defense spending increased, and nondefense purchases returned to more typical levels af- ter the partial federal government shutdown in the first quarter. Real purchases by state and local governments rose moderately, boosted by a strong gain in spending on structures and an increase in the payrolls of those governments. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in May relative to April, as imports increased more than ex- ports. In June, preliminary data indicated declining nominal goods exports and imports. Within exports, de- clines were particularly notable for exports of consumer Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ goods and capital goods, the latter of which had already been depressed by the suspension of Boeing 737 MAX exports. All told, the BEA estimates that net exports, after adding moderately to first-quarter GDP growth, subtracted a similar amount from GDP growth in the second quarter on declining exports and flat imports. Incoming data suggested that growth in the foreign economies remained subdued in the second quarter. In several key advanced foreign economies, including the euro area, recent indicators pointed to slowing economic growth amid continued weakness in manufacturing and persistent policy-related uncertainty. Similarly, in China, real GDP growth slowed notably in the second quarter after a first-quarter jump. In contrast, growth in Canada and, to a lesser extent, Latin America appeared to pick up from a weak first-quarter pace. Foreign inflation re- mained muted but rose a bit from lows earlier in the year, largely reflecting higher energy prices. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, financial market develop- ments reflected noticeable shifts in expectations for monetary policy in response to Federal Reserve commu- nications, economic data releases, and trade policy de- velopments. Federal Reserve communications were generally regarded as more accommodative than had been anticipated, exerting downward pressure on measures of the expected path for the federal funds rate. However, some better-than-expected economic data re- leases and a slight improvement in the outlook regarding trade partially offset these declines. Yields on nominal Treasury securities were little changed on net. Equity prices increased, corporate bond spreads narrowed, and inflation compensation rose modestly. Financing condi- tions for businesses and households were little changed over the intermeeting period and remained generally supportive of spending. Measures of expectations for near-term domestic mon- etary policy exhibited notable shifts and reversals over the intermeeting period and ended the period little changed, on net, with market participants still attaching high odds to a 25 basis point reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate at the July FOMC meet- ing. Consistent with significant variation in near-term expectations for monetary policy, market-based indica- tors of interest rate uncertainty for shorter maturities over the near term remained somewhat elevated. Over the intermeeting period, market-based expectations for the federal funds rate for the end of this year and beyond moved down slightly on net. A straight read of OIS (overnight index swap) forward rates implied that the federal funds rate would decline about 60 basis points in 2019 and about 35 basis points in 2020. The nominal U.S. Treasury yield curve was little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period. Both the near-term forward spread and the spread between 10-year and 3-month Treasury yields are still in the bot- tom decile of their respective distributions since 1971. On net, in the weeks following the June FOMC meeting, 5-year and 5-to-10-year inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) moved up modestly. More-accommodative-than-expected Fed- eral Reserve communications, stronger-than-expected inflation data releases, and rising oil prices—amid in- creased geopolitical tensions with Iran—contributed to the upward pressure on inflation compensation. Broad stock price indexes increased, on net, over the in- termeeting period, with notable increases following the June FOMC communications, the Chair’s July Monetary Policy Report testimony, and announcements regarding trade negotiations following the G-20 meeting. Addi- tionally, there was a slight positive reaction to news of an agreement on the federal budget and debt limit. Eq- uity price increases were broad based across major sec- tors, with technology, financial, and communication ser- vices firms outperforming broad indexes. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—decreased slightly, on net, and corporate credit spreads narrowed. Conditions in domestic short-term funding markets re- mained fairly stable. Overnight interest rates in both un- secured and secured markets were somewhat elevated over the period. In particular, repo rates were elevated on and after the June quarter-end, with the SOFR (Se- cured Overnight Financing Rate) averaging 8 basis points above the IOER rate over the intermeeting pe- riod. However, the EFFR remained well within the tar- get range, averaging 5 basis points above the IOER rate. Rates on commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit declined somewhat. Accommodative central bank communications, both in the United States and abroad, and some easing of trade tensions generally supported foreign risky assets over the intermeeting period. Global equity indexes increased modestly, while emerging market sovereign spreads nar- rowed. On balance, the broad dollar index ended the period modestly lower. Notably, the British pound de- preciated significantly against the U.S. dollar, reportedly as developments led investors to raise the probability they attached to a no-deal Brexit. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 30–31, 2019Page 7 Most sovereign long-term bond yields edged lower, on net, reflecting firming expectations for further policy ac- commodation amid growing concerns about the global economic outlook. Italian yields declined notably, in part as the government passed some fiscal consolidation measures. The European Central Bank left its policy rate unchanged at its July meeting but signaled possible rate cuts at coming meetings and said it will explore options for additional asset purchases. Several emerging market central banks, including South Korea, Turkey, and Indo- nesia, lowered policy rates over the period. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses re- mained accommodative. Gross issuance of corporate bonds remained robust in June, followed by a typical sea- sonal decline in July. Issuance of institutional leveraged loans increased notably in May but in June, it returned to the more moderate pace observed earlier this year. Respondents to the July 2019 Senior Loan Officer Opin- ion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) re- ported that, on net, banks continued to ease standards and terms on commercial and industrial loans to large and middle-market firms in the second quarter, with many citing aggressive competition as the reason for do- ing so. Gross equity issuance has been strong in recent months. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations continued to show signs of stabilization in June follow- ing some deterioration earlier in the year. Credit condi- tions for both small businesses and municipalities re- mained accommodative on balance. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions remained generally accommodative despite a modest deceleration in bank loan growth. Banks in the July SLOOS reported that standards were about un- changed, on net, in the second quarter for most CRE loan categories. Agency and non-agency commercial MBS issuance was strong in the second quarter, as yield spreads ticked down. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative over the intermeeting period. Mortgage rates were little changed since the June FOMC meeting but remained about 1 percentage point below their late-2018 level. These conditions have supported a modest increase in home-purchase origination volume in recent months. Refinance originations have risen as well but remain near historical lows. In consumer credit markets, financing conditions were little changed in recent months and remained generally supportive of consumer spending. Growth in consumer credit in April and May was up a bit from earlier in the year due to a pickup in credit card balances. Banks in the July SLOOS continued to report tightened standards for credit cards over the second quarter. The staff provided an update on its assessments of po- tential risks to financial stability. On balance, the staff continued to view vulnerabilities as moderate. The staff judged asset valuation pressures to be notable in a num- ber of markets, supported in part by the low level of Treasury yields. In assessing vulnerabilities stemming from leverage in the household and business sectors, the staff noted that business leverage was high while house- hold leverage was moderate. The staff viewed the buildup in nonfinancial business-sector debt as a factor that could amplify adverse shocks to the business sector and the economy more generally. Within business debt, the staff also reported that in the leveraged loan market, the share of new loans to risky borrowers was at a record high, and credit extended by private equity firms had continued to grow. At the same time, financial institu- tions were viewed as resilient, as the risks associated with financial leverage and funding risk were still viewed as low despite some signs of rising leverage and continued inflows into run-prone funds. Separately, the staff noted that market liquidity was, overall, in good shape, al- though sudden price drops had become more frequent in some markets. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the July FOMC meeting was revised up somewhat in the near term, as an upward revision to households’ real disposable income in the first half of the year led to a slightly higher second-half forecast for consumer spending. Even so, real GDP growth was still forecast to rise more slowly in the second half of the year than in the first half, primarily reflecting continued soft business investment and a slower increase in govern- ment spending. The projection for real GDP growth over the medium term was a little stronger, supported by the effects of a higher projected path for equity prices and a lower trajectory for interest rates. Real GDP was forecast to expand at a rate a little above the staff’s esti- mate of potential output growth in 2019 and 2020 and then slow to a pace slightly below potential output growth in 2021. The unemployment rate was projected to be roughly flat through 2021 and to remain below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate. With labor market conditions judged to be tight, the staff continued to assume that projected employment gains would man- ifest in smaller-than-usual downward pressure on the unemployment rate and in larger-than-usual upward pressure on the labor force participation rate. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The staff’s forecast of total PCE price inflation this year was revised up a touch, reflecting a slightly higher pro- jected path for consumer energy prices, while the fore- cast for core PCE price inflation was unrevised at a level below 2 percent. Both total and core inflation were pro- jected to move up slightly next year, as the low readings early this year were expected to be transitory, but never- theless to continue to run below 2 percent. The staff continued to view the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as generally similar to the average of the past 20 years. Moreover, the staff still judged that the risks to the forecast for real GDP growth were tilted to the downside, with a corresponding skew to the up- side for the unemployment rate. Important factors in that assessment were that international trade tensions and foreign economic developments seemed more likely to move in directions that could have significant nega- tive effects on the U.S. economy than to resolve more favorably than assumed. In addition, softness in busi- ness investment and manufacturing so far this year was seen as pointing to the possibility of a more substantial slowing in economic growth than the staff projected. With the risks to the forecast for economic activity tilted to the downside, the risks to the inflation projection were also viewed as having a downward skew. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants agreed that the labor market had remained strong over the intermeeting period and that economic activity had risen at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate had remained low. Although growth of household spending had picked up from earlier in the year, growth of business fixed investment had been soft. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compen- sation remained low; survey-based measures of longer- term inflation expectations were little changed. Participants continued to view a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective as the most likely outcomes. This outlook was predicated on financial conditions that were more ac- commodative than earlier this year. More accommoda- tive financial conditions, in turn, partly reflected market reaction to the downward adjustment through the course of the year in the Committee’s assessment of the appropriate path for the target range of the federal funds rate in light of weak global economic growth, trade pol- icy uncertainty, and muted inflation pressures. Participants generally noted that incoming data over the intermeeting period had been largely positive and that the economy had been resilient in the face of ongoing global developments. The economy continued to ex- pand at a moderate pace, and participants generally ex- pected GDP growth to slow a bit to around its estimated potential rate in the second half of the year. However, participants also observed that global economic growth had been disappointing, especially in China and the euro area, and that trade policy uncertainty, although waning some over the intermeeting period, remained elevated and looked likely to persist. Furthermore, inflation pres- sures continued to be muted, notwithstanding the firm- ing in the overall and core PCE price indexes in the three months ending in June relative to earlier in the year. In their discussion of the business sector, participants generally saw uncertainty surrounding trade policy and concerns about global growth as continuing to weigh on business confidence and firms’ capital expenditure plans. Participants generally judged that the risks associated with trade uncertainty would remain a persistent head- wind for the outlook, with a number of participants re- porting that their business contacts were making deci- sions based on their view that uncertainties around trade were not likely to dissipate anytime soon. Some partici- pants observed that trade uncertainties had receded somewhat, especially with the easing of trade tensions with Mexico and China. Several participants noted that, over the intermeeting period, business sentiment seemed to improve a bit and commented that the data for new capital goods orders had improved. Some participants expressed the view that the effects of trade uncertainty had so far been modest and referenced reports from business contacts in their Districts that investment plans were continuing, though with a more cautious posture. Participants also discussed developments across the manufacturing, agriculture, and energy sectors of the U.S. economy. Manufacturing production had declined so far this year, dragged down in part by weak real ex- ports, the ongoing global slowdown, and trade uncer- tainties. Several participants noted ongoing challenges in the agricultural sector, including those associated with increased trade uncertainty, weak export demand, and the effects of wet weather and severe flooding. A couple of participants commented on the decline in energy prices since last fall and the associated reduction in eco- nomic activity in the energy sector. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 30–31, 2019Page 9 Participants commented on the robust pace of con- sumer spending. Noting the important role that house- hold spending was currently playing in supporting the expansion, participants judged that household spending would likely continue to be supported by strong labor market conditions, rising incomes, and upbeat consumer sentiment. A few participants noted that the continued softness in residential investment was a concern, and that the expected boost to housing activity from the de- cline in mortgage rates since last fall had not yet materi- alized. In contrast, a couple of participants reported that some recent indicators of housing activity in their Dis- tricts had been somewhat more positive of late. In their discussion of the labor market, participants judged that conditions remained strong, with the unem- ployment rate near historical lows and continued solid job gains, on average, in recent months. Job gains in June were stronger than expected, following a weak reading in May. Looking ahead, participants expected the labor market to remain strong, with the pace of job gains slower than last year but above what is estimated to be necessary to hold labor utilization steady. Reports from business contacts pointed to continued strong la- bor demand, with many firms reporting difficulty finding workers to meet current demand. Several participants reported seeing notable wage pressures for lower-wage workers. However, participants viewed overall wage growth as broadly consistent with the modest average rates of labor productivity growth in recent years and, consequently, as not exerting much upward pressure on inflation. Several participants remarked that there seemed to be little sign of overheating in labor markets, citing the combination of muted inflation pressures and moderate wage growth. Regarding inflation developments, some participants stressed that, even with the firming of readings for con- sumer prices in recent months, both overall and core PCE price inflation rates continued to run below the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective; the latest reading on the 12-month change in the core PCE price index was 1.6 percent. Furthermore, continued weak- ness in global economic growth and ongoing trade ten- sions had the potential to slow U.S. economic activity and thus further delay a sustained return of inflation to the 2 percent objective. Many other participants, how- ever, saw the recent inflation data as consistent with the view that the lower readings earlier this year were largely transitory, and noted that the trimmed mean measure of PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was running around 2 percent. A few participants noted differences in the behavior of measures of cyclical and acyclical components of infla- tion. By some estimates, the cyclical component of in- flation continued to firm; the acyclical component, which appeared to be influenced by sectoral and techno- logical changes, was largely responsible for the low level of inflation and not likely to respond much to monetary policy actions. In their discussion of the outlook for inflation, partici- pants generally anticipated that with appropriate policy, inflation would move up to the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. However, market- based measures of inflation compensation and some sur- vey measures of consumers’ inflation expectations re- mained low, although they had moved up some of late. A few participants remarked that inflation expectations appeared to be reasonably well anchored at levels con- sistent with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objec- tive. However, some participants stressed that the pro- longed shortfall in inflation from the long-run goal could cause inflation expectations to drift down—a develop- ment that might make it more difficult to achieve the Committee’s mandated goals on a sustained basis, espe- cially in the current environment of global disinflation- ary pressures. A couple of participants observed that, although some indicators of longer-term inflation expec- tations, like TIPS-based inflation compensation and the Michigan survey measure, had not changed substantially this year, on net, they were notably lower than their lev- els several years ago. Participants generally judged that downside risks to the outlook for economic activity had diminished somewhat since their June meeting. The strong June employment report suggested that the weak May payroll figures were not a precursor to a more material slowdown in job growth. The agreement between the United States and China to resume negotiations appeared to ease trade ten- sions somewhat. In addition, many participants noted that the recent agreement on the federal debt ceiling and budget appropriations substantially reduced near-term fiscal policy uncertainty. Moreover, the possibility of fa- vorable outcomes of trade negotiations could be a factor that would provide a boost to economic activity in the future. Still, important downside risks persisted. In par- ticular, participants were mindful that trade tensions were far from settled and that trade uncertainties could intensify again. Continued weakness in global economic growth remained a significant downside risk, and some participants noted that the likelihood of a no-deal Brexit had increased. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ In their discussion of financial market developments, participants observed that financial conditions remained supportive of economic growth, with borrowing rates low and stock prices near all-time highs. Participants ob- served that current financial conditions appeared to be premised importantly on expectations that the Federal Reserve would ease policy to help offset the drag on eco- nomic growth stemming from the weaker global outlook and uncertainties associated with international trade as well as to provide some insurance to address various downside risks. Participants also discussed the decline in yields on longer-term nominal Treasury securities in recent months. A few participants expressed the con- cern that the inversion of the Treasury yield curve, as evidenced by the 10-year yield falling below the 3-month yield, had persisted for about two months, which could indicate that market participants anticipated weaker eco- nomic conditions in the future and that the Federal Re- serve would soon need to lower the federal funds rate substantially in response. The longer-horizon real for- ward rate implied by TIPS had also declined, suggesting that the longer-run normal level of the real federal funds rate implicit in market prices was lower. Among those participants who commented on financial stability, most highlighted recent credit market develop- ments, the elevated valuations in some asset markets, and the high level of nonfinancial corporate indebted- ness. Several participants noted that high levels of cor- porate debt and leveraged lending posed some risks to the outlook. A few participants discussed the fast growth of private credit markets—a sector not subject to the same degree of regulatory scrutiny and require- ments that applies in the banking sector—and com- mented that it was important to monitor this market. Several participants observed that valuations in equity and corporate bond markets were near all-time highs and that CRE valuations were also elevated. A couple of par- ticipants noted that the low level of Treasury yields—a factor seen as supporting asset prices across a range of markets—was a potential source of risk if yields moved sharply higher. However, these participants judged that in the near term, such risks were small in light of the monetary policy outlooks in the United States and abroad and generally subdued inflation. A few partici- pants expressed the concern that capital ratios at the largest banks had continued to fall at a time when they should ideally be rising and that capital ratios were ex- pected to decline further. Another view was that finan- cial stability risks at present are moderate and that the largest banks would continue to maintain very substan- tial capital cushions in light of a range of regulatory re- quirements, including rigorous stress tests. In their discussion of monetary policy decisions at this meeting, those participants who favored a reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate pointed to three broad categories of reasons for supporting that ac- tion.  First, while the overall outlook remained favorable, there had been signs of deceleration in economic ac- tivity in recent quarters, particularly in business fixed investment and manufacturing. A pronounced slowing in economic growth in overseas econo- mies—perhaps related in part to developments in, and uncertainties surrounding, international trade— appeared to be an important factor in this decelera- tion. More generally, such developments were among those that had led most participants over re- cent quarters to revise down their estimates of the policy rate path that would be appropriate to pro- mote maximum employment and stable prices.  Second, a policy easing at this meeting would be a prudent step from a risk-management perspective. Despite some encouraging signs over the intermeet- ing period, many of the risks and uncertainties sur- rounding the economic outlook that had been a source of concern in June had remained elevated, particularly those associated with the global eco- nomic outlook and international trade. On this point, a number of participants observed that policy authorities in many foreign countries had only lim- ited policy space to support aggregate demand should the downside risks to global economic growth be realized.  Third, there were concerns about the outlook for in- flation. A number of participants observed that overall inflation had continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent objective, as had inflation for items other than food and energy. Several of these participants commented that the fact that wage pres- sures had remained only moderate despite the low unemployment rate could be a sign that the longer- run normal level of the unemployment rate is appre- ciably lower than often assumed. Participants dis- cussed indicators for longer-term inflation expecta- tions and inflation compensation. A number of them concluded that the modest increase in market- based measures of inflation compensation over the intermeeting period likely reflected market partici- pants’ expectation of more accommodative mone- tary policy in the near future; others observed that, _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 30–31, 2019Page 11 while survey measures of inflation expectations were little changed from June, the level of expectations by at least some measures was low. Most participants judged that long-term inflation expectations either were already below the Committee’s 2 percent goal or could decline below the level consistent with that goal should there be a continuation of the pattern of inflation coming in persistently below 2 percent. A couple of participants indicated that they would have preferred a 50 basis point cut in the federal funds rate at this meeting rather than a 25 basis point reduction. They favored a stronger action to better address the stub- bornly low inflation rates of the past several years, rec- ognizing that the apparent low sensitivity of inflation to levels of resource utilization meant that a notably stronger real economy might be required to speed the return of inflation to the Committee’s inflation objec- tive. Several participants favored maintaining the same target range at this meeting, judging that the real economy con- tinued to be in a good place, bolstered by confident con- sumers, a strong job market, and a low rate of unemploy- ment. These participants acknowledged that there were lingering risks and uncertainties about the global econ- omy in general, and about international trade in particu- lar, but they viewed those risks as having diminished over the intermeeting period. In addition, they viewed the news on inflation over the intermeeting period as consistent with their forecasts that inflation would move up to the Committee’s 2 percent objective at an accepta- ble pace without an adjustment in policy at this meeting. Finally, a few participants expressed concerns that fur- ther monetary accommodation presented a risk to finan- cial stability in certain sectors of the economy or that a reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting could be misinterpreted as a negative signal about the state of the economy. Participants also discussed the timing of ending the re- duction in the Committee’s aggregate securities holdings in the SOMA. Ending the reduction of securities hold- ings in August had the advantage of avoiding the appear- ance of inconsistency in continuing to allow the balance sheet to run off while simultaneously lowering the target range for the federal funds rate. But ending balance sheet reduction earlier than under its previous plan posed some risk of fostering the erroneous impression that the Committee viewed the balance sheet as an active tool of policy. Because the proposed change would end the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings only two months earlier than previously indicated, policymak- ers concluded that there were only small differences be- tween the two options in their implications for the bal- ance sheet and thus also in their economic effects. In their discussion of the outlook for monetary policy beyond this meeting, participants generally favored an approach in which policy would be guided by incoming information and its implications for the economic out- look and that avoided any appearance of following a pre- set course. Most participants viewed a proposed quar- ter-point policy easing at this meeting as part of a recali- bration of the stance of policy, or mid-cycle adjustment, in response to the evolution of the economic outlook over recent months. A number of participants suggested that the nature of many of the risks they judged to be weighing on the economy, and the absence of clarity re- garding when those risks might be resolved, highlighted the need for policymakers to remain flexible and focused on the implications of incoming data for the outlook. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members noted that while there had been some im- provement in economic conditions over the intermeet- ing period and the overall outlook remained favorable, significant risks and uncertainties attending the outlook remained. In particular, sluggish U.S. business fixed in- vestment spending and manufacturing output had lin- gered, suggesting that risks and uncertainties associated with weak global economic growth and in international trade were weighing on the domestic economy. Strong labor markets and rising incomes continued to support the outlook for consumer spending, but modest growth in prices and wages suggested that inflation pressures re- mained muted. Inflation had continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent symmetric objective. Market- based measures of inflation compensation moved up modestly from the low levels recorded in June, but a por- tion of this change likely reflected the expectation by market participants of additional near-term monetary ac- commodation. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed. On this basis, all but two members agreed to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 2 to 2¼ percent at this meeting. With this adjustment to policy, those members who voted for the policy action sought to better position the overall stance of policy to help counter the effects on the outlook of weak global growth and trade policy uncer- tainty, insure against any further downside risks from those sources, and promote a faster return of inflation to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective than Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ would otherwise be the case. Those members noted that the action taken at this meeting should be viewed as part of an ongoing reassessment of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate that began in late 2018. Two mem- bers preferred to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate. In explaining their policy views, those members noted that economic data collected over the intermeeting period had been largely positive and that they anticipated continued strong labor markets and solid growth in activity, with inflation gradually moving up to the Committee’s 2 percent target. One member also noted that a further easing in policy at a time when the economy is very strong and asset prices are elevated could have adverse implications for financial stability. Members agreed that in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and ex- pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum-employment and symmetric 2 percent infla- tion objectives. They reiterated that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. Members generally agreed that it was important to main- tain optionality in setting the future target range for the federal funds rate and, more generally, that near-term ad- justments of the stance of monetary policy would appro- priately remain dependent on the implications of incom- ing information for the economic outlook. With regard to the postmeeting statement, the Commit- tee implemented several adjustments in the description of the economic situation, including a revision to recog- nize that market-based measures of inflation compensa- tion “remain low.” The Committee stated that the re- duction in the target range for the federal funds rate sup- ported its view that “sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective” re- mained the most likely outcomes, but “uncertainties about this outlook remain.” The phrase “as the Com- mittee contemplates the future path” of the target range for the federal funds rate was added to underscore the Committee’s intention to carefully assess incoming in- formation before deciding on future policy adjustments. The statement noted that the Committee would “con- tinue to monitor the implications of incoming infor- mation for the economic outlook” and would “act as ap- propriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objec- tive.” Finally, the Committee announced the conclusion of the reduction of securities holdings in the SOMA. Ending the runoff of securities holdings two months earlier than initially planned was seen as having only very small effects on the balance sheet, with negligible impli- cations for the economic outlook, and was helpful in simplifying communications regarding the usage of the Committee’s policy tools. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective August 1, 2019, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2 to 2¼ percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol- iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer- ing rate of 2.00 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-coun- terparty limit of $30 billion per day. Effective August 1, 2019, the Committee di- rects the Desk to roll over at auction all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities and to reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities received during each calendar month. Principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month will be reinvested in Treasury securities to roughly match the ma- turity composition of Treasury securities out- in excess of standing; principal payments $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in agency mortgage-backed securities. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 30–31, 2019Page 13 The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June indicates that the labor market remains strong and that eco- nomic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Although growth of household spending has picked up from earlier in the year, growth of business fixed investment has been soft. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In light of the implications of global developments for the economic out- look as well as muted inflation pressures, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 2 to 2¼ percent. This action supports the Committee’s view that sus- tained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective are the most likely outcomes, but uncertainties about this outlook remain. As the Committee contemplates the future path of the target range for the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor the implications of incoming infor- mation for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its sym- metric 2 percent objective. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its 7 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Chicago, St. Louis, Dallas, and San Francisco. This vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 2.75 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of August 1, 2019, and the date such Re- serve Banks informed the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments. The Committee will conclude the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings in the System Open Market Account in August, two months earlier than previously indicated.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Wil- liams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Richard H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: Esther L. George and Eric Rosengren. President George dissented because she believed that an unchanged setting of policy was appropriate based on the incoming data and the outlook for economic activity over the medium term. Recognizing risks to the outlook from the crosscurrents emanating from trade policy un- certainty and weaker global activity, President George would be prepared to adjust policy should incoming data point to a materially weaker outlook for the economy. President Rosengren dissented because he did not see a clear and compelling case for additional accommodation at this time given that the unemployment rate stood near 50-year lows, inflation seemed likely to rise toward the Committee’s 2 percent target, and financial stability con- cerns were elevated, as indicated by near-record equity prices and corporate leverage. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 2 to 2¼ per- cent, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to lower the interest rate paid on required and excess re- serve balances to 2.10 percent and voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to 2.75 percent, effective August 1, 2019.7 Banks of Boston, New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and Kansas City were informed of the Secretary of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 2.75 percent, effective August 1, 2019.) A sec- ond vote of the Board encompassed approval of the establish- ment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates. Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Reinvestment Plans The manager pro tem described the Desk’s plans for re- investments in light of the Committee’s decision to con- clude the reduction of aggregate securities holdings in the SOMA portfolio effective August 1. In accordance with the directive to the Desk, beginning on August 1, all principal payments from Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS will be reinvested. Principal pay- ments from Treasury securities held in the SOMA port- folio will be reinvested through rollovers in Treasury auctions. The Desk also will reinvest principal payments from agency debt and agency MBS securities of up to $20 billion per month in Treasury securities in a manner that roughly matches the maturity composition of Treas- ury securities outstanding. The Desk plans to purchase these Treasury securities in the secondary market across 11 sectors of different maturities and security types ap- proximately in proportion to the 12-month average of the amount outstanding in each sector relative to the to- tal amount outstanding across sectors, as measured at the end of July. The Desk will continue to reinvest agency debt and agency MBS principal payments in ex- cess of $20 billion per month in agency MBS. Given the Committee’s decision to bring forward the timing of these purchases to August, the Desk planned to release an operational statement to provide more details on the plans for reinvestment operations. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, September 17– 18, 2019. The meeting adjourned at 11:15 a.m. on July 31, 2019. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on July 9, 2019, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on June 18–19, 2019. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 30–31, 2019Page 15 

Page 1 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee September 17–18, 2019 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 17, 2019, continued on Wednesday, at September 18, 2019, at 9:00 a.m.1 10:15 a.m. and PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Richard H. Clarida Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Randal K. Quarles Eric Rosengren Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Eric Belsky,2 Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors; Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Trevor A. Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Board Members, Board of Governors Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, William Wascher, Jonathan L. Willis, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager pro tem, System Open Market Account 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of the review of the mone- tary policy framework. Brian M. Doyle, Wendy E. Dunn, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and Ivan Vidangos, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Antulio Bomfim, Jane E. Ihrig, and Edward Nelson, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 3 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 2 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ David López-Salido, Associate Director, Division of Kenneth C. Montgomery, First Vice President, Federal Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; John J. Stevens, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Andrew Figura and John M. Roberts, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Matteo Iacoviello and Andrea Raffo,2 Deputy Associate Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,3 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Zeynep Senyuz,4 Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,5 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Martin Bodenstein,2 Section Chief, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors David H. Small,6 Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Hess T. Chung,2 Group Manager, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Jonathan E. Goldberg, Edward Herbst,2 and Benjamin K. Johannsen, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Fabian Winkler,2 Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams,2 Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors James Hebden,2 Senior Technology Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Reserve Bank of Boston David Altig,2 Kartik B. Athreya, Michael Dotsey, Jeffrey Fuhrer,2 Sylvain Leduc, Simon Potter,7 and Ellis W. Tallman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Philadelphia, Boston, San Francisco, New York, and Cleveland, respectively David Andolfatto, Marc Giannoni, Evan F. Koenig,2 Paula Tkac, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, Dallas, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively Jonas Fisher, Giovanni Olivei, Giorgio Topa, and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, Boston, New York, and New York, respectively Jonas Arias,2 Thorsten Drautzburg,2 and Leonardo Melosi,2 Senior Economists, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, and Chicago, respectively Fernando Duarte,2 Financial Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices Committee participants continued their discussions re- lated to the ongoing review of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Staff briefings provided an assessment of the risk that the federal funds rate could, in some future downturn, be constrained by the effective lower bound (ELB) and discussed options for mitigating the costs as- sociated with this constraint. The staff’s analysis sug- gested that the ELB would likely bind in most future re- cessions, which could make it more difficult for the FOMC to achieve its longer-run objectives of maximum employment and symmetric 2 percent inflation. The staff discussed several options for mitigating ELB risks, including using forward guidance and balance sheet pol- icies earlier and more aggressively than in the past. 4 Attended the discussion of developments in financial mar- kets and open market operations. 5 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 6 Attended the discussion of the review of the monetary policy framework through the end of the meeting. 7 Attended opening remarks for Tuesday session only. Page 3 Minutes of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ The staff also illustrated the properties of “makeup” strategies using model simulations. Under such strate- gies, policymakers would promise to make up for past inflation shortfalls with a sustained accommodative stance of policy that is intended to generate higher future inflation. These strategies are designed to provide ac- commodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate low for an extended period in order to support an economic recovery. Because of their properties both at and away from the ELB, makeup strategies may also more firmly anchor inflation expectations at 2 percent than a policy strategy that does not compensate for past inflation misses. The staff analysis emphasized, however, that the benefits of makeup strategies depend importantly on the private sector’s understanding of these strategies and their confidence that future policymakers would follow through on promises to keep policy accommodative. Participants generally agreed with the staff’s analysis that the risk of future ELB episodes had likely increased over time, and that future ELB episodes and the reduced ef- fect of resource utilization on inflation could inhibit the Committee’s ability to achieve its employment and infla- tion objectives. The increased ELB risk was attributed in part to structural changes in the U.S. economy that had lowered the longer-run real short-term interest rate and thus the neutral level of the policy rate. In this con- text, a couple of participants noted that uncertainty about the neutral rate made it especially challenging to determine any appropriate changes to the current frame- work. In light of a low neutral rate and shortfalls of in- flation below the 2 percent objective for several years, some participants raised the concern that the policy space to reduce the federal funds rate in response to fu- ture recessions could be compressed further if inflation shortfalls continued and led to a decline in inflation ex- pectations, a risk that was also discussed in the staff anal- ysis. These participants pointed to long, ongoing ELB spells in other major foreign economies and suggested that, to avoid similar circumstances in the United States, it was important to be aggressive when confronted with forces holding inflation below objective. A couple of participants judged that the lack of monetary policy space abroad and the possibility that fiscal space in the United States might be limited reinforced the case for strengthening the FOMC’s monetary policy framework as a matter of prudent planning. With regard to the current monetary policy framework, participants agreed that this framework served the Com- mittee well in the aftermath of the financial crisis. A number of participants noted that the Committee’s ex- perience with forward guidance and balance sheet poli- cies would likely allow the Committee to deploy these tools earlier and more aggressively in the event that they were needed. A few indicated that the uncertainty about the effectiveness of these policies was smaller than the uncertainty surrounding the effectiveness of a makeup strategy. Participants generally agreed that the current framework also served the Committee well by providing a strong commitment to achieving the Committee’s maximum- employment and symmetric inflation objectives. Such a commitment was seen as flexible enough to allow the Committee to choose policy actions that best support its objectives in a wide array of economic circumstances. Because of the downside risk to inflation and employ- ment associated with the ELB, most participants were open to the possibility that the dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and stable prices could be best served by strategies that deliver inflation rates that over time are, on average, equal to the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. Promoting such out- comes may require aiming for inflation somewhat above 2 percent when the policy rate was away from the ELB, recognizing that inflation would tend to be lower than 2 percent when the policy rate was constrained by the ELB. Participants suggested several alternatives for do- ing so, including strategies that make up for past infla- tion shortfalls and those that respond more aggressively to below-target inflation than to above-target inflation. In this context, several participants suggested that the adoption of a target range for inflation could be helpful in achieving the Committee’s objective of 2 percent in- flation, on average, as it could help communicate to the public that periods in which the Committee judged in- flation to be moderately away from its 2 percent objec- tive were appropriate. A couple of participants sug- gested analyzing policies in which there was a target range for inflation whose midpoint was modestly higher than 2 percent or in which 2 percent was an inflation floor; these policies might enhance policymakers’ scope to provide accommodation as appropriate when the neutral real interest rate was low. Although ensuring inflation outcomes averaging 2 per- cent over time was seen as important, many participants noted that the illustrated makeup strategies delivered only modest benefits in the staff’s model simulations. These modest benefits in part reflected that the respon- siveness of inflation to resource slack had diminished, making it more difficult to provide sufficient accommo- dation to push inflation back to the Committee’s objec- tive in a timely manner. Some participants suggested Page 4 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ that the modest effects were particularly pronounced us- ing the FRB/US model and indicated the need for more robustness analysis of simulation results along several di- mensions and for further comparison to other alterna- tive strategies. In addition, several participants noted that the implementation of the makeup strategies in the form of either average inflation targeting or price-level targeting in the simulations was tied too rigidly to the details of particular rules. An advantage of the current framework over such alternative approaches is that it has provided the Committee with the flexibility to assess a broad range of factors and information in choosing its policy actions, and these actions can vary depending on economic circumstances in order to best achieve the Committee’s dual mandate. Similarly, makeup strategies could be implemented more flexibly in order to deliver more accommodation during a future downturn and through the subsequent recovery than what could be achieved with a mechanical makeup rule. Participants also discussed a number of challenges asso- ciated with makeup strategies. Many participants ex- pressed reservations with the makeup strategies analyzed by the staff. Some participants raised the concern that the effective use of the makeup strategies in the form of the average inflation targeting and price-level targeting rules that the staff presented depended on future policy- makers following through on commitments to keep pol- icy accommodative for a long time. Such commitments might be difficult for future policymakers to follow through on, especially in situations in which the labor market was strong and inflation was above target. A few participants acknowledged that credibly committing to makeup strategies posed challenges. However, they pointed to the commitments that central banks around the world made to inflation targeting as examples in which similar challenges had been overcome. A couple of participants raised the concern that keeping policy rates low for a long time could lead to excessive risk- taking in financial markets and threaten financial stabil- ity. However, a couple of other participants judged that macroprudential tools could be used to help ensure that any overleveraging of households and firms did not threaten the financial system, while monetary policy needed to be focused on achieving maximum employ- ment and symmetric 2 percent inflation. A few partici- pants viewed the communication challenges associated with average-inflation targeting strategies, including the difficulty of conveying the dangers of low inflation to the public, as greater than for some other strategies that use threshold-based forward guidance. Several partici- pants noted that makeup strategies could unduly limit the policy response in situations in which inflation had been running above 2 percent amid signs of an impend- ing economic downturn. Accordingly, these participants favored makeup strategies that only reversed past infla- tion shortfalls relative to makeup strategies that reversed both past inflation shortfalls and past overruns. Participants continued to discuss the benefits of the Committee’s review of the monetary policy framework as well as the Committee’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which articulates the Committee’s approach to monetary policy. As they did at their meeting in July, participants mentioned sev- eral issues that this statement might possibly address. These issues included the conduct of monetary policy in the presence of the ELB constraint, the role of inflation expectations in the Committee’s pursuit of its inflation goal, the best means of conveying the Committee’s bal- anced approach to monetary policy, the symmetry of its inflation goal, and the time frame over which the Com- mittee aimed to achieve it. Participants expected that they would continue their deliberations on these and other topics pertinent to the review at upcoming meet- ings. They also generally agreed that the Committee’s consideration of possible modifications to its policy strategy, tools, and communication practices would take some time, and that the process would be careful, delib- erate, and patient. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager pro tem first discussed developments in global financial markets over the intermeeting period. Global financial markets were volatile over the inter- meeting period, with market participants reacting to in- coming information about U.S.–China trade tensions and the global growth outlook. In the weeks following the July FOMC meeting, U.S. yields declined sharply and risk asset prices fell amid a spate of largely negative news about risks to the global economic outlook. These price moves reversed to some degree in September as devel- opments on trade and economic data turned more posi- tive. On net, Treasury yields remained substantially lower, while the S&P 500 and corporate credit spreads reversed most or all of their earlier losses to end the pe- riod little changed. Even after the partial rebound in September, market- and survey-based indicators of policy rate expectations suggested that investors viewed it as very likely that the Committee would ease policy further at this meeting. All respondents from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants viewed a 25 basis Page 5 Minutes of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ point decrease in the target range as the most likely out- come at this meeting. Looking beyond September, most survey respondents expected another 25 basis point cut by year-end. Further out, while the median of respond- ents’ modal forecasts for the end of 2020 pointed to no rate cuts next year, individual forecasts were much more dispersed, with nearly half of respondents expecting at least one additional 25 basis point cut in 2020, and about one-fourth expecting two or more cuts. Market partici- pants remained attentive to a range of global risk factors that could affect the policy rate path, including trade ten- sions between the United States and China, develop- ments in Europe, political tensions in Hong Kong, un- certainties related to Brexit, and escalating geopolitical tension in the Middle East following attacks on Saudi oil facilities. The manager pro tem turned next to a discussion of money market conditions. Money markets were stable over most of the period, and the reduction in the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate following the July FOMC meeting fully passed through to money market rates. However, money markets became highly volatile just before the September meeting, apparently spurred partly by large corporate tax payments and Treasury set- tlements, and remained so through the time of the meet- ing. In an environment of greater perceived uncertainty about potential outflows related to the corporate tax payment date, typical lenders in money markets were less willing to accommodate increased dealer demand for funding. Moreover, some banks maintained reserve lev- els significantly above those reported in the Senior Fi- nancial Officer Survey about their lowest comfortable level of reserves rather than lend in repo markets. Money market mutual funds reportedly also held back some liquidity in order to cushion against potential out- flows. Rates on overnight Treasury repurchase agree- ments rose to over 5 percent on September 16 and above 8 percent on September 17. Highly elevated repo rates passed through to rates in un- secured markets. Federal Home Loan Banks reportedly scaled back their lending in the federal funds market in order to maintain some liquidity in anticipation of higher demand for advances from their members and to shift more of their overnight funding into repo. In this envi- ronment, the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) rose to the top of the target range on September 16. The fol- lowing morning, in accordance with the FOMC’s di- rective to the Desk to foster conditions to maintain the EFFR in the target range, the Desk conducted overnight repurchase operations for up to $75 billion. After the operation, rates in secured and unsecured markets de- clined sharply. Rates in secured markets were trading around 2.5 percent after the operation. Market partici- pants reportedly expected that additional temporary open market operations would be necessary both over subsequent days and around the end of the quarter. Many also reportedly expected another 5 basis point technical adjustment of the IOER rate. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available for the September 17–18 meeting indicated that labor market conditions remained strong and that real gross domestic product (GDP) ap- peared to be increasing at a moderate rate in the third quarter. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for per- sonal consumption expenditures (PCE), was below 2 percent in July. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a solid pace in July and August, although at a slower rate than in the first half of the year. (Separately, the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ preliminary estimate of the upcoming benchmark revision to payroll employment, which will be incorporated in the published data in February 2020, indicated that the revised pace of average monthly job gains from April 2018 to March 2019 would be notably slower than in the current published data.) The unem- ployment rate remained at 3.7 percent through August, and both the labor force participation rate and the em- ployment-to-population ratio moved up. The unem- ployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics de- clined over July and August, while the rates for whites and Asians increased; the unemployment rate for each group was below its level at the end of the previous eco- nomic expansion, though persistent differentials be- tween these rates remained. The average share of work- ers employed part time for economic reasons in July and August continued to be below its level in late 2007. Both the rate of private-sector job openings and the rate of quits moved roughly sideways in June and July and were still at relatively high levels; the four-week moving aver- age of initial claims for unemployment insurance bene- fits through early September was near historically low levels. Total labor compensation per hour in the busi- ness sector increased 4.4 percent over the four quarters Page 6 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ ending in the second quarter, a faster rate than a year earlier. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 3.2 percent over the 12 months ending in August, the same pace as a year earlier. Total consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in July. This increase was slower than a year earlier, as core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) moved down to 1.6 percent, consumer food price inflation remained be- low core inflation, and consumer energy prices declined. The average monthly change in core PCE prices in re- cent months was faster than earlier this year, suggesting that the soft inflation readings during the earlier period were transitory. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Dallas remained at 2 percent in July. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 1.7 percent over the 12 months ending in August, while core CPI inflation was 2.4 percent. Recent survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. The preliminary September reading from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers dipped after edging up in August, but it remained within its recent range; the measures of longer-run inflation ex- pectations from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants were little changed. Real consumer expenditures appeared to be rising solidly in the third quarter after expanding strongly in the sec- ond quarter. Real PCE rose briskly in July, while the components of the nominal retail sales data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to estimate PCE were flat in August and the rate of sales of light motor vehicles only edged up, suggesting some slowing in con- sumer spending growth in the third quarter from its strong second-quarter pace. Key factors that influence consumer spending—including a low unemployment rate, further gains in real disposable income, high levels of households’ net worth, and generally low borrowing rates—were supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. The preliminary September reading on the Michigan survey measure of consumer sentiment picked up a little after weakening notably in August, although the Conference Board survey measure of consumer con- fidence did not show a similar decline in August. Real residential investment seemed to be picking up a little in the third quarter after declining over the previous year and a half. Starts of new single-family homes were higher in July and August than the second-quarter aver- age, and starts of multifamily units rose in August after falling back in July. Building permit issuance for new single-family homes—which tends to be a good indica- tor of the underlying trend in construction of such homes—was higher in July and August than its second- quarter average. Sales of existing homes rose modestly in July, while new home sales declined following an out- sized increase in June. Real nonresidential private fixed investment looked to be declining further in the third quarter. Nominal ship- ments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft de- creased in July, and forward-looking indicators generally pointed to continued softness in business equipment spending. Orders for nondefense capital goods exclud- ing aircraft increased in June but were still below the level of shipments, most measures of business sentiment deteriorated, analysts’ expectations of firms’ longer-term profit growth declined further, and trade policy concerns continued to weigh on firms’ investment decisions. Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential struc- tures outside the drilling and mining sector decreased in July, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for struc- tures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to de- cline through mid-September. Industrial production increased modestly, on net, over July and August, but production remained notably lower than at the beginning of the year. Automakers’ assembly schedules indicated that the production of light motor vehicles would be roughly flat in the near term (although the labor strike at General Motors was expected to tem- porarily disrupt vehicle production), while new orders indexes from national and regional manufacturing sur- veys and a persistent drag from trade tariffs pointed to- ward continued softness in factory output in coming months. Total real government purchases appeared to be rising at a slower pace in the third quarter than in the second quarter. Federal defense spending over July and August decelerated, and federal hiring of temporary workers for next year’s decennial census was modest in August. State and local government payrolls rose moderately over July and August, and nominal spending by these governments on structures in July was below its second- quarter average. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit remained about unchanged in June before narrowing in July. Ex- ports, which had been soft over most of the past year, declined sharply in June but partially rebounded in July. This pattern was particularly notable in exports of non- aircraft capital goods and consumer goods. Imports also Page 7 Minutes of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ declined sharply in June and then declined a little further in July. Imports of oil and consumer goods fell in June, while imports of capital goods dropped significantly in July. The BEA estimated that the change in net exports was a drag of about ¾ percentage point on real GDP growth in the second quarter. Foreign economic growth remained subdued in the sec- ond quarter. Growth picked up in Canada as oil produc- tion rebounded, but growth slowed sharply in Europe amid a downturn in manufacturing activity and persis- tent policy-related uncertainty. Growth also slowed in China and India. Recent indicators suggested wide- spread weakness in manufacturing abroad even as ser- vices activity appeared to be holding up relatively well. Foreign inflation rose in the second quarter, pushed up by earlier increases in oil prices as well as by rising food prices in some emerging economies. However, data on foreign core consumer prices showed little sign of un- derlying inflationary pressures abroad. Late in the inter- meeting period, an attack on a key oil facility in Saudi Arabia disrupted Saudi oil production and caused an in- itial spike in prices on near-dated oil futures contracts. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Financial market developments over the intermeeting period were driven by an escalation in international trade tensions, growing concerns about the global economic growth outlook, and the prospect of more policy accom- modation by central banks. Nominal Treasury yields posted very large declines in August as investors reacted to the U.S. Administration’s announcement of addi- tional tariffs on Chinese goods, along with the deprecia- tion of the Chinese renminbi through the perceived threshold of 7 renminbi per U.S. dollar and the associ- ated implications of these actions for the global eco- nomic outlook. Treasury yields partially rebounded fol- lowing better-than-expected incoming economic data in the United States and abroad, a perceived reduction in the probability of a no-deal Brexit, and some positive headlines about trade policy. The market-implied path of the federal funds rate shifted down on net. Broad equity price indexes were down as much as 6 percent in early August but almost fully recovered by the end of the intermeeting period. Spreads on investment-grade cor- porate bonds widened modestly, while those on specu- lative-grade corporate bonds were little changed on net. Financing conditions for businesses and households were largely unaffected by the intermeeting turbulence in financial markets and remained generally supportive of spending and economic activity. Measures of expectations of the near- and medium-term path for the federal funds rate were particularly sensitive to news about U.S.–China trade tensions, while FOMC communications had only modest effects on market- based measures of policy rate expectations. A straight read of the option-implied probability distribution of the federal funds rate suggested that the odds investors at- tached to a 25 basis point reduction in the target range of the federal funds rate at the September FOMC meet- ing increased from about 50 percent at the time of the July FOMC meeting to 90 percent by the end of the in- termeeting period. Respondents to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants as- signed, on average, similarly high odds to a rate decrease at the September FOMC meeting. In addition, market- implied expectations for the federal funds rate at year- end and beyond moved down. A straight read of OIS (overnight index swap) forward rates suggested that in- vestors expected the federal funds rate to decline about 45 basis points by year-end, to a level nearly 10 basis points lower than was expected at the time of the July FOMC meeting, and to decrease an additional roughly 45 basis points by the end of 2020. Nominal Treasury yields decreased, on net, over the in- termeeting period, with longer-term yields falling the most. The spread between 10-year and 3-month Treas- ury yields became a bit more negative, while the spread between 10-year and 2-year Treasury yields turned neg- ative for the first time since 2007 and fluctuated around zero until the September FOMC meeting. Measures of inflation compensation derived from Treasury Inflation- Protected Securities declined on net. Broad stock price indexes decreased slightly, on net, over the intermeeting period amid heightened volatility. The escalation of trade tensions between China and the United States weighed on equity prices, but investors’ expectations that major central banks would shift toward more accommodative monetary policies provided some support. Equity prices were also boosted by better-than- anticipated corporate earnings and retail-sector data. Stock prices of firms with high exposure to China un- derperformed the broader market somewhat, as did bank stocks amid downward revisions to banks’ earnings forecasts. Conversely, the stock prices of utilities and real estate firms increased noticeably, reportedly benefit- ing from demand by investors reaching for less cyclical and higher-yielding assets. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—was little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period and re- mained at the lower end of its historical distribution after retracing a sharp increase in early August. Page 8 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Despite the volatility in many domestic and global finan- cial markets over the intermeeting period, conditions in domestic short-term funding markets remained stable until the Monday before the September FOMC meeting, when flows associated with a combination of corporate tax payments and Treasury coupon securities settle- ments led to significant tightening of conditions, partic- ularly for overnight funding. The EFFR rose to the top of the target range on September 16 and exceeded it by 5 basis points on September 17, after which funding pressures eased somewhat following the Desk’s open market operations. On net, the EFFR averaged 2.14 percent over the current intermeeting period, with the spread to the IOER rate down a bit relative to the previous intermeeting period. Early in the intermeeting period, bond yields in the ad- vanced foreign economies (AFEs) plunged and foreign equities declined notably following an increase in U.S.– China trade tensions. Some weakness in foreign eco- nomic data, growing concerns about global growth, and the prospect of more monetary policy accommodation abroad contributed to further declines in yields. Later in the period, AFE yields partially rebounded and foreign equity prices fully recovered on some easing of U.S.– China trade tensions, as well as perceptions of reduced political uncertainty in the United Kingdom and Italy. Financial market reactions were mixed after the Euro- pean Central Bank (ECB) announced a package of policy easing measures, including a rate cut on deposits at the ECB, resumption of its asset purchase program, and more favorable terms for longer-term lending to banks. The dollar appreciated against emerging market curren- cies but was little changed, on balance, against AFE cur- rencies, leaving the broad dollar index slightly higher. Emerging market sovereign bond spreads widened no- tably. The Argentine peso depreciated sharply and Ar- gentine sovereign yields soared following the defeat of the current pro-market president in the primary election and the subsequent announcement of plans for debt re- structuring and the imposition of capital controls. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses re- mained accommodative. Overall issuance of corporate bonds was solid in August, driven by resilient invest- ment-grade issuance. While speculative-grade corporate bond issuance was somewhat subdued in August, it was comparable to that seen over the same period in 2018. Growth of commercial and industrial loans at banks ticked up, driven by faster growth at large domestic banks. There were no initial public equity offerings by domestic firms in August amid increased market volatil- ity, but several deals were expected to be completed in the coming months. On balance, the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations weakened slightly, with the volume of nonfinancial corporate bond downgrades modestly outpacing that of upgrades in recent months. Credit conditions for both small businesses and munici- palities remained accommodative on balance. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions remained generally accommodative. Bank CRE loan growth slowed moderately since the second quarter, driven by slower growth in loans secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties. The volume of agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities issuance was slightly weaker in July and August than in the same period last year, though industry ana- lysts reportedly anticipated that issuance would soon pick up in response to recent declines in interest rates. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market eased over the intermeeting period. Residential mort- gage rates declined less than long-term Treasury yields, as the increase in prepayment risk and the rise in implied interest rate volatility reportedly reduced the demand for mortgage-backed securities. Home-purchase origina- tions and refinancing originations both rose. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re- mained generally supportive of growth in consumer spending, although supply conditions continued to be tight for subprime credit card borrowers. Consumer credit expanded at a moderate pace in the second quarter overall, with bank credit data pointing to continued growth through July and August. In consumer asset- backed securities markets, issuance was solid, and spreads remained at relatively low levels, though some- what above their post-crisis averages. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the September FOMC meeting was little changed in the near term; real GDP growth was still forecast to be slower in the second half of the year than in the first half, mostly attributable to continued soft business investment and a slower increase in govern- ment spending. The projection for real GDP growth over the medium term was a bit weaker than the previ- ous forecast, primarily reflecting the effects of a higher projected path for the foreign exchange value of the dol- lar and a lower trajectory for economic growth abroad, which were partially offset by a lower assumed path for interest rates. Real GDP was forecast to expand at a rate a little above the staff’s estimate of potential output Page 9 Minutes of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ growth in 2019 and 2020 and then slow to a pace slightly below potential output growth in 2021 and 2022. The unemployment rate was projected to be roughly flat through 2022 and to remain below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate, which was revised down a lit- tle. In addition, the staff revised up its estimate of the level of trend productivity in recent years after incorpo- rating the BEA’s recent annual revisions to the national income and product accounts. Both of these supply-side adjustments led to a somewhat higher projected path for potential output, implying that estimates of current and projected resource utilization were less tight than the staff previously assumed. The staff’s forecast of total PCE price inflation for this year was revised down somewhat, reflecting slightly lower projected paths for consumer food and energy prices, along with a little lower forecast for core PCE prices. The core PCE price inflation forecast for this year was revised down to reflect recent data as well as downward-revised data for earlier in the year from the BEA’s annual revision. Both total and core inflation were projected to move up slightly next year, as the low readings early this year were expected to be transitory; nevertheless, both inflation measures were forecast to continue to run below 2 percent through 2022. The staff continued to view the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as generally similar to the average of the past 20 years. Moreover, the staff still judged that the risks to the forecast for real GDP growth were tilted to the downside, with a corresponding skew to the up- side for the unemployment rate. Important factors in that assessment were that international trade tensions and foreign economic developments seemed more likely to move in directions that could have significant nega- tive effects on the U.S. economy than to resolve more favorably than assumed. In addition, softness in busi- ness investment and manufacturing so far this year was seen as pointing to the possibility of a more substantial slowing in economic growth than the staff projected. The risks to the inflation projection were also viewed as having a downward skew, in part because of the down- side risks to the forecast for economic activity Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2019 through 2022 and over the longer run, based on their individual assess- ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each partici- pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- priate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. These projections are described in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is an addendum to these minutes. Participants agreed that the labor market had remained strong over the intermeeting period and that economic activity had risen at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate had remained low. Although household spending had risen at a strong pace, business fixed in- vestment and exports had weakened. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 percent. Market- based measures of inflation compensation remained low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation ex- pectations were little changed. Participants generally viewed the baseline economic out- look as positive and indicated that their views of the most likely outcomes for economic activity and inflation had changed little since the July meeting. However, for most participants, that economic outlook was premised on a somewhat more accommodative path for policy than in July. Participants generally had become more concerned about risks associated with trade tensions and adverse developments in the geopolitical and global eco- nomic spheres. In addition, inflation pressures contin- ued to be muted. Many participants expected that real GDP growth would moderate to around its potential rate in the second half of the year. Participants agreed that consumer spending was increasing at a strong pace. They also expected that, in the period ahead, household spending would likely remain on a firm footing, sup- ported by strong labor market conditions, rising in- comes, and accommodative financial conditions. Sev- eral participants indicated that the housing sector was starting to rebound, stimulated by a significant decline in mortgage rates. With regard to the contrast between ro- bust consumption growth and weak investment growth, several participants mentioned that uncertainties in the business outlook and sustained weak investment could eventually lead to slower hiring, which, in turn, could damp the growth of income and consumption. In their discussion of the business sector, participants saw trade tensions and concerns about the global out- Page 10 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ look as the main factors weighing on business invest- ment, exports, and manufacturing production. Partici- pants judged that trade uncertainty and global develop- ments would continue to affect firms’ investment spend- ing, and that this uncertainty was discouraging them from investing in their businesses. A couple of partici- pants noted that businesses had the capacity to adjust to ongoing uncertainty concerning trade, and some firms were reconfiguring supply chains and making logistical arrangements as part of contingency planning to mitigate the effects of trade tensions on their businesses. Participants discussed developments in the manufactur- ing and the agricultural sectors of the U.S. economy. Manufacturing production remained lower than at the beginning of the year, and recent indicators suggested that conditions were unlikely to improve materially over the near term. Participants saw the ongoing global slow- down and trade uncertainty as contributing importantly to these declines. A few participants noted ongoing challenges in the agricultural sector, including those as- sociated with tariffs, weak export demand, and more in- tense financial burdens arising from the increase in car- ryover debt in preceding years. Participants commented on the potential disruption to global oil production aris- ing from the attack on Saudi Arabia’s facilities. Participants judged that conditions in the labor market remained strong, with the unemployment rate near his- torical lows and continued solid job gains, on average, in recent months. The labor force participation rate of prime-age individuals, especially of prime-age women, moved up in August, continuing its upward trajectory, and the unemployment rate of African Americans fell to its lowest rate on record. However, a number of partic- ipants noted that, although the labor market was clearly in a strong position, the preliminary benchmark revision by the Bureau of Labor Statistics indicated that payroll employment gains would likely show less momentum coming into this year when the revisions are incorpo- rated in published data early next year. A few partici- pants observed that it would be important to be vigilant in monitoring incoming data for any sign of softening in labor market conditions. That said, reports from busi- ness contacts in many Districts pointed to continued strong labor demand, with some firms still reporting dif- ficulties finding qualified workers and others broadening their recruiting to include traditionally marginalized groups. In some Districts, employers were also expand- ing training and provision of nonwage benefits, which could help sustain their expansion of hiring against a background of a very tight national labor market without spurring above-trend aggregate wage growth. Some firms were also reluctant to raise wages because of their limited pricing power, while others thought the wages they were offering were in line with the skill sets of the workers available to fill new positions. Participants gen- erally viewed overall wage growth as broadly consistent with modest average rates of labor productivity growth in recent years and as exerting little upward pressure on inflation. A couple of participants noted that, with in- flationary pressures remaining muted and wage growth moderate even as employment and spending expanded further, they had again adjusted downward their esti- mates of the longer-run normal unemployment rate. In their discussion of inflation developments, partici- pants noted that, despite a recent firming in the incom- ing data, readings on overall and core PCE inflation had continued to run below the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. Furthermore, in light of weakness in the global economy, perceptions of downside risks to growth, and subdued inflation pressures, some partici- pants continued to view the risks to the outlook for in- flation as weighted to the downside. Some participants, however, saw the recent inflation data as consistent with their previous assessment that much of the weakness seen early in the year was transitory. In this connection, several participants noted that recent monthly readings, notably for CPI inflation, seemed broadly consistent with the Committee’s longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent, while the trimmed mean measure of PCE in- flation, constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dal- las, remained at 2 percent in July. In their discussion of the outlook for inflation, partici- pants generally agreed that, under appropriate policy, in- flation would move up to the Committee’s 2 percent ob- jective over the medium term. Participants saw inflation expectations as reasonably well anchored, but many par- ticipants observed that market-based measures of infla- tion compensation and some survey measures of con- sumers’ inflation expectations were at historically low levels. Some of these participants further noted that longer-term inflation expectations could be somewhat below levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective, or that continued weakness in infla- tion could prompt expectations to drift lower. Participants generally judged that downside risks to the outlook for economic activity had increased somewhat since their July meeting, particularly those stemming from trade policy uncertainty and conditions abroad. In addition, although readings on the labor market and the overall economy continued to be strong, a clearer picture Page 11 Minutes of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ of protracted weakness in investment spending, manu- facturing production, and exports had emerged. Partic- ipants also noted that there continued to be a significant probability of a no-deal Brexit, and that geopolitical ten- sions had increased in Hong Kong and the Middle East. Several participants commented that, in the wake of this increase in downside risk, the weakness in business spending, manufacturing, and exports could give rise to slower hiring, a development that would likely weigh on consumption and the overall economic outlook. Several participants noted that statistical models designed to gauge the probability of recession, including those based on information from the yield curve, suggested that the likelihood of a recession occurring over the medium term had increased notably in recent months. However, a couple of these participants stressed the difficulty of extracting the right signal from these probability models, especially in the current period of unusually low levels of term premiums. With regard to developments in financial markets, par- ticipants noted that longer-term U.S. Treasury rates had been volatile over the intermeeting period but, on net, had registered a sizable decline. Participants observed that a key source of downward pressure on Treasury rates arose from flight-to-safety flows, driven by down- side risks to global growth, escalating trade tensions, and disappointing global data. Low interest rates abroad were also considered an important influence on U.S. longer-term rates. Participants expressed a range of views about the implications of low longer-term Treas- ury rates. Some participants judged that a prolonged in- version of the yield curve could be a matter of concern. Participants also noted that equity prices had exhibited volatility but had been largely flat, on balance, over the intermeeting period. Several participants cited consider- ations that led them to be concerned about financial sta- bility, including low risk spreads and a buildup of corpo- rate debt, corporate stock buybacks financed through low-cost leverage, and the pace of lending in the CRE market. However, several others pointed to signs that the financial system remained resilient. In their consideration of the monetary policy options at this meeting, most participants believed that a reduction of 25 basis points in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate. In discussing the reasons for such a decision, these participants pointed to considera- tions related to the economic outlook, risk management, and the need to center inflation and inflation expecta- tions on the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 per- cent. Participants noted that there had been little change in their economic outlook since the July meeting and that incoming data had continued to suggest that the pace of economic expansion was consistent with the mainte- nance of strong labor market conditions. However, a couple of participants pointed out that data revisions an- nounced in recent months implied that the economy had likely entered the year with somewhat less momentum than previously thought. In addition, data received since July had confirmed the weakening in business fixed in- vestment and exports. One risk that the economy faced was that the softness recorded of late in firms’ capital formation, manufacturing, and exporting activities might spread to their hiring decisions, with adverse im- plications for household income and spending. Partici- pants observed that such an eventuality was not embed- ded in their baseline outlook; however, a couple of them indicated that this was partly because they assumed that an appropriate adjustment to the policy rate path would help forestall that eventuality. Several also noted that, because monetary policy actions affected economic ac- tivity with a lag, it was appropriate to provide the requi- site policy accommodation now to support economic ac- tivity over coming quarters. Participants favoring a modest adjustment to the stance of monetary policy at this juncture cited other risks to the economic outlook that further underscored the case for such a move. As their discussion of risks had high- lighted, downside risks had become more pronounced since July: Trade uncertainty had increased, prospects for global growth had become more fragile, and various intermeeting developments had intensified geopolitical risks. Against this background, risk-management con- siderations implied that it would be prudent for the Committee to adopt a somewhat more accommodative stance of policy. In addition, a number of participants suggested that a reduction at this meeting in the target range for the federal funds rate would likely better align the target range with a variety of indicators of the appro- priate policy stance, including those based on estimates of the neutral interest rate. A few participants observed that the considerations favoring easing were reinforced by the proximity of the federal funds rate to the ELB. If policymakers provided adequate accommodation while still away from the ELB, this course of action would help forestall the possibility of a prolonged ELB episode. Many participants also cited the level of inflation or in- flation expectations as justifying a reduction of 25 basis points in the federal funds rate at this meeting. Inflation had generally fallen short of the Committee’s objective Page 12 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ for several years and, notwithstanding some stronger re- cent monthly readings on inflation, the 12-month rate was still below 2 percent. Some estimates of trend infla- tion were also below 2 percent. Several participants ad- ditionally stressed that survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations and market-based measures of in- flation compensation were near historical lows and that these values pointed to the possibility that inflation ex- pectations were below levels consistent with the 2 per- cent objective or could soon fall below such levels. Against this backdrop, participants suggested that a pol- icy easing would help underline policymakers’ commit- ment to the symmetric 2 percent longer-run objective. With inflation pressures muted and U.S. inflation likely being weighed down by global disinflationary forces, policymakers saw little chance of an outsized increase in inflation in response to additional policy accommoda- tion and argued that such an increase, should it occur, could be addressed in a straightforward manner using conventional monetary policy tools. Several participants favored maintaining the existing tar- get range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. These participants suggested that the baseline projection for the economy had changed very little since the Com- mittee’s previous meeting and that the state of the econ- omy and the economic outlook did not justify a shift away from the current policy stance, which they felt was already adequately accommodative. They acknowledged the uncertainties that currently figured importantly in evaluations of the economic outlook, but they con- tended that the key uncertainties were unlikely to be re- solved soon. Furthermore, as they did not believe that these uncertainties would derail the expansion, they did not see further policy accommodation as needed at this time. Changes in the stance of policy, they believed, should instead occur only when the macroeconomic data readily justified those moves. In this connection, a couple of participants suggested that, if it decided to pro- vide more policy accommodation at the present junc- ture, the Committee might be taking out too much in- surance against possible future shocks, leaving monetary policy with less scope to boost aggregate demand in the event that such shocks materialized. A few of the par- ticipants favoring an unchanged target range for the fed- eral funds rate also expressed concern that an easing of monetary policy at this meeting could exacerbate finan- cial imbalances. A couple of participants indicated their preference for a 50 basis point cut in the federal funds rate at this meet- ing. These participants suggested that a larger policy move would help reduce the risk of an economic down- turn and would more appropriately recognize important recent developments, such as slowing job gains, weaken- ing investment, and continued low values of market- based measures of inflation compensation. In addition, these participants stressed the need for a policy stance— possibly one using enhanced forward guidance—that was sufficiently accommodative to make it unlikely that the United States would experience a protracted period of the kind seen abroad in which the economy became mired in a combination of undesirably low inflation, weak economic activity, and near-zero policy rates. They also argued that it was desirable for the Committee to seek and maintain a level of accommodation sufficient to deliver inflation at 2 percent on a sustained basis and that such a policy would be consistent with inflation ex- ceeding 2 percent for a time. With regard to monetary policy beyond this meeting, participants agreed that policy was not on a preset course and would depend on the implications of incoming in- formation for the evolution of the economic outlook. A few participants judged that the expectations regarding the path of the federal funds rate implied by prices in financial markets were currently suggesting greater pro- vision of accommodation at coming meetings than they saw as appropriate and that it might become necessary for the Committee to seek a better alignment of market expectations regarding the policy rate path with policy- makers’ own expectations for that path. Several partici- pants suggested that the Committee’s postmeeting state- ment should provide more clarity about when the recal- ibration of the level of the policy rate in response to trade uncertainty would likely come to an end. Participants’ Discussion of Recent Money Market Developments The manager pro tem provided a summary of the most recent developments in money markets. Open market operations conducted on the previous day had helped to ease strains in money markets, but the EFFR had none- theless printed 5 basis points above the top of the target range. With significant pressures still evident in repo markets and the federal funds market, and in accordance with the FOMC’s directive to maintain the federal funds rate within the target range, the Desk conducted another repo operation on the morning of the second day of the meeting. The staff presented a proposal to lower the IOER rate and the overnight reverse repurchase agree- ment rate by 5 basis points, relative to the target range for the federal funds rate, in order to foster trading of federal funds within the target range. Page 13 Minutes of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Participants agreed that developments in money markets over recent days implied that the Committee should soon discuss the appropriate level of reserve balances sufficient to support efficient and effective implementa- tion of monetary policy in the context of the ample-re- serves regime that the Committee had chosen. A few participants noted the possibility of resuming trend growth of the balance sheet to help stabilize the level of reserves in the banking system. Participants agreed that any Committee decision regarding the trend pace of bal- ance sheet expansion necessary to maintain a level of re- serve balances appropriate to facilitate policy implemen- tation should be clearly distinguished from past large- scale asset purchase programs that were aimed at altering the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s asset holdings in order to provide monetary policy accommo- dation and ease overall financial conditions. Several par- ticipants suggested that such a discussion could benefit from also considering the merits of introducing a stand- ing repurchase agreement facility as part of the frame- work for implementing monetary policy. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members noted that information received since the July meeting indicated that the labor market remained strong and that economic activity had been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Household spending had been rising at a strong pace. However, business fixed investment and exports had weakened, and this outcome suggested that risks and un- certainty associated with international trade develop- ments and with ongoing weakness in global economic growth were continuing to weigh on the domestic econ- omy. On a 12-month basis, both the overall inflation rate and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were lit- tle changed. In light of these developments, most mem- bers agreed to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1¾ to 2 percent at this meeting. With this adjustment to policy, those members who sup- ported the policy action sought to make the overall stance of monetary policy most consistent with helping to offset the effects on aggregate demand of weak global growth and trade policy uncertainty, insure against fur- ther downside risks arising from those sources and from geopolitical developments, and promote a more rapid return of inflation to the Committee’s symmetric 2 per- cent objective than would otherwise occur. A couple of these members observed that, because monetary policy actions affected aggregate spending with a lag, the pre- sent meeting was an appropriate occasion for providing accommodation that would support economic activity in the period ahead. Two members preferred to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. These members noted that economic data re- ceived over the intermeeting period had been largely positive and that they anticipated, under an unchanged policy stance, continued strong labor markets and solid growth in activity, with inflation gradually moving up to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. These members also suggested that providing further accommodation during a period of high economic activity and elevated asset prices could have adverse consequences for finan- cial stability. One member preferred a reduction in the target range of 50 basis points in the federal funds rate at this meeting. This member suggested that such a larger rate adjustment would be more consistent with the achievement of the Committee’s objectives over time and, in particular, with helping preclude the possibility of a protracted period in which inflation and employ- ment were below the Committee’s objectives. Members agreed that, in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and ex- pected economic conditions relative to its maximum- employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent infla- tion objective. They also agreed that those assessments would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed to update the language of the Committee’s de- scription of incoming data to acknowledge the weaken- ing in investment spending and in U.S. exports, as well as the recent strong rate of increase of household spend- ing. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective September 19, 2019, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1¾ to 2 percent, including overnight Page 14 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ reverse repurchase operations (and reverse re- purchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conven- tions) at an offering rate of 1.70 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such op- erations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and to continue reinvesting all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities received during each calendar month. Principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in Treasury securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities outstanding; principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in agency mortgage-backed securities. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in July indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has re- mained low. Although household spending has been rising at a strong pace, business fixed in- vestment and exports have weakened. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are run- ning below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey- based measures of longer-term inflation expec- tations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In light of the implications of global developments for the economic out- look as well as muted inflation pressures, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1¾ to 2 percent. This action supports the Committee’s view that sus- tained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective are the most likely outcomes, but uncertainties about this outlook remain. As the Committee contemplates the future path of the target range for the federal funds rate, it will continue to monitor the implications of incoming infor- mation for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its sym- metric 2 percent objective. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren. President Bullard dissented because he believed that lowering the target range for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points at this time would provide insurance against further declines in expected inflation and a slow- ing economy subject to elevated downside risks. In ad- dition, a 50 basis point cut at this time would help pro- mote a more rapid return of inflation and inflation ex- pectations to target. President George dissented be- cause she believed that an unchanged setting of policy was appropriate based on incoming data and the outlook for economic activity over the medium term. Recogniz- ing the risks to the outlook from the effects of trade pol- icy and weaker global activity, President George would be prepared to adjust policy should incoming data point Page 15 Minutes of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ to a materially weaker outlook for the economy. Presi- dent Rosengren dissented because he judged that mon- etary policy was already accommodative. In his view, additional accommodation was not needed for an econ- omy in which labor markets are already tight and could pose risks of further inflating the prices of risky assets and encouraging households and firms to take on too much leverage. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1¾ to 2 percent, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to lower the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 1.80 percent and voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to 2.50 percent, effective September 19, 2019. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, October 29– 30, 2019. The meeting adjourned at 10:40 a.m. on Sep- tember 18, 2019. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on August 20, 2019, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 30–31, 2019. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 1 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- tee (FOMC) meeting held on September 17–18, 2019, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2019 to 2022 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on infor- mation available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy— including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer- run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projec- tions represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to con- verge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.1 “Ap- propriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to fos- ter outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Participants who submitted longer-run projections ex- pected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth of real GDP in 2019 would run slightly or somewhat above their individual estimates of its longer-run rate. Participants expected real GDP growth to edge down over the projection horizon, with all participants project- ing growth in 2022 to be at or modestly below their es- timates of its longer-run rate. Almost all participants who submitted longer-run projections expected that the unemployment rate through 2022 would run below their estimates of its longer-run level. All participants contin- ued to project that total inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the price index for per- sonal consumption expenditures (PCE), would increase from 2019 to 2020, and many expected another slight increase in 2021. The vast majority of participants ex- pected that inflation would be at or slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2021 and 2022. The median of participants’ projections for core PCE price inflation increased over the projection period, rising to 2.0 percent in 2021. Table 1 and figure 1 provide sum- mary statistics for the projections. Compared with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from June 1 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. 2019, some participants slightly revised down their esti- mates of the longer-run unemployment rate; the median estimate of the longer-run unemployment rate was un- changed. Participants’ projections for total and core in- flation were generally little changed compared with their projections in June. As shown in figure 2, participants expected that the evo- lution of the economy, relative to their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, would likely warrant a federal funds rate target by the end of this year at or below the target range that the Committee adopted at its July 30–31 meeting. Compared with the June SEP submissions, the median projection for the federal funds rate was 50 basis points lower for the end of 2019 and 25 basis points lower for the end of 2020 and 2021. In the September SEP submissions, the me- dian for the federal funds rate for 2020 was equal to the median for 2019. The median of participants’ assess- ments of the appropriate level for the federal funds rate in 2022 was slightly below the median of participants’ estimates of its longer-run level. Some participants re- vised lower their assessments of the longer-run federal funds rate, but the median assessment of the longer-run federal funds rate was unchanged. Most participants regarded the uncertainties around their forecasts for GDP growth, total inflation, and core inflation as broadly similar to the average over the past 20 years. Just over half of the participants viewed the level of uncertainty around their unemployment rate projections as being similar to the average of the past 20 years, while the rest of the participants viewed uncer- tainty as higher. Most participants assessed the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and for the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside. Most participants judged the risks to the in- flation outlook as broadly balanced; some participants viewed the risks to inflation as weighted to the downside, and no participant assessed risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. Participants’ assessments of the uncer- tainties and risks around their forecasts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate were little changed overall relative to June. The uncertainties around their projections for headline and core inflation were little Page 2 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ , s t n e d i s e r p k n a B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F d n a s r e b m e m d r a o B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F f o s n o i t c e j o r p c i m o n o c E . 1 e l b a T 9 1 0 2 r e b m e t p e S , y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p f o s n o i t p m u s s a l a u d i v i d n i r i e h t r e d n u 3 e g n a R 2 y c n e d n e T l a r t n e C 1 n a i d e M 2 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 r e g n o L 2 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 r e g n o L 2 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 e l b a i r a V t n e c r e P r e g n o L n u r 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 5 . 4 – 6 . 3 5 . 4 – 6 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 3 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 7 . 1 – 4 . 1 7 . 1 – 4 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 3 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 8 . 1 – 6 . 1 8 . 1 – 4 . 1 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 6 . 1 – 5 . 1 6 . 1 – 5 . 1 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 8 . 1 – 7 . 1 8 . 1 – 7 . 1 n u r 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 5 . 1 3 . 2 – 7 . 1 3 . 2 – 5 . 1 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 4 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 7 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 3 . 2 – 1 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 4 – 3 . 3 1 . 4 – 3 . 3 2 . 4 – 3 . 3 0 . 4 – 3 . 3 0 . 4 – 3 . 3 8 . 3 – 5 . 3 8 . 3 – 5 . 3 3 . 4 – 0 . 4 4 . 4 – 0 . 4 0 . 4 – 7 . 3 9 . 3 – 6 . 3 0 . 4 – 6 . 3 8 . 3 – 6 . 3 9 . 3 – 5 . 3 7 . 3 – 6 . 3 7 . 3 – 6 . 3 n u r 9 . 1 9 . 1 2 . 4 2 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 2 8 . 1 9 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 9 . 1 8 . 1 8 . 3 8 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 7 . 3 7 . 3 9 . 1 9 . 1 9 . 1 9 . 1 2 . 2 1 . 2 7 . 3 6 . 3 5 . 1 5 . 1 8 . 1 8 . 1 P D G l a e r n i e g n a h C n o i t c e j o r p e n u J e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n U n o i t c e j o r p e n u J 4 n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o C n o i t c e j o r p e n u J n o i t c e j o r p e n u J n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P h t a p y c i l o p e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r P : o m e M 3 . 3 – 0 . 2 3 . 3 – 4 . 2 9 . 2 – 6 . 1 6 . 2 – 6 . 1 1 . 3 – 9 . 1 4 . 2 – 6 . 1 1 . 3 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 6 . 2 – 9 . 1 8 . 2 – 5 . 2 0 . 3 – 5 . 2 6 . 2 – 9 . 1 4 . 2 – 6 . 1 6 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 4 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 4 . 2 – 9 . 1 5 . 2 5 . 2 4 . 2 1 . 2 4 . 2 9 . 1 1 . 2 9 . 1 4 . 2 n o i t c e j o r p e n u J e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e F h t r u o f e h t m o r f s e g n a h c t n e c r e p e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i f o s e r u s a e m h t o b r o f s n o i t c e j o r p d n a ) P D G ( t c u d o r p c i t s e m o d s s o r g l a e r n i e g n a h c f o s n o i t c e j o r P : e t o N , y l e v i t c e p s e r , n i e g n a h c f o s e t a r e g a t n e c r e p e h t e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c d n a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t o t r a e y s u o i v e r p e h t f o r e t r a u q e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r P . y g r e n e d n a d o o f g n i d u l c x e E C P r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t d n a ) E C P ( s e r u t i d n e p x e n o i t p m u s n o c l a n o s r e p r o f x e d n i e c i r p f o t n e m s s e s s a r e h r o s i h n o d e s a b e r a s n o i t c e j o r p s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a E . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t n i e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u n a i l i v i c e g a r e v a e h t r o f e h t e r a e g r e v n o c o t d e t c e p x e e b d l u o w e l b a i r a v h c a e h c i h w o t e t a r e h t f o t n e m s s e s s a s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a e t n e s e r p e r s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a t n i o p d i m e h t f o e u l a v e h t e r a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p e h T . y m o n o c e e h t o t s k c o h s r e h t r u f f o e c n e s b a e h t n i d n a y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a r e d n u d e ﬁ i c e p s e h t f o d n e e h t t a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f l e v e l t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t r o e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f e g n a r t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t f o , 9 1 - 8 1 e n u J n o e e t t i m m o C t e k r a M n e p O l a r e d e F e h t f o g n i t e e m e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e d a m e r e w s n o i t c e j o r p e n u J e h T . n u r r e g n o l e h t r e v o r o r a e y r a d n e l a c h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o , e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t , P D G l a e r n i e g n a h c e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o l t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n O . 9 1 0 2 . g n i t e e m , 9 1 0 2 , 8 1 - 7 1 r e b m e t p e S e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i s n o i t c e j o r p h c u s t i m b u s t o n d i d t n a p i c i t r a p e n o d n a , g n i t e e m , 9 1 0 2 , 9 1 - 8 1 e n u J e h t , n e v e s i s n o i t c e j o r p f o r e b m u n e h t n e h W . t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f d e g n a r r a e r a s n o i t c e j o r p e h t n e h w n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , d o i r e p h c a e r o F . 1 . r a e y t a h t n i e l b a i r a v t a h t r o f , t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f , s n o i t c e j o r p ’ s t n a p i c i t r a p l l a s e d u l c n i r a e y n e v i g a n i e l b a i r a v a r o f e g n a r . r a e y h c a e n i e l b a i r a v h c a e r o f s n o i t c e j o r p t s e w o l e e r h t d n a t s e h g i h e e r h t e h t s e d u l c x e y c n e d n e t l a r t n e c e h T e h T . d e t c e l l o c t o n e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . 2 . 3 . 4 . s n o i t c e j o r p e l d d i m o w t e h t f o e g a r e v a e h t s i n a i d e m e h t Page 3 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2019-22 and over the longer run Change in real GDP Median of projections Central tendency of projections Range of projections Actual 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Unemployment rate 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 PCE inflation 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Core PCE inflation Percent Longer run Percent Longer run Percent Longer run Percent 3 2 1 7 6 5 4 3 3 2 1 3 2 1 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. Page 4 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate Percent 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer run Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. Page 5 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ changed as well, but more participants saw the inflation risks as broadly balanced than in June. The Outlook for Real GDP Growth and Unemploy- ment As shown in table 1, the median of participants’ projec- tions for the growth rate of real GDP in 2019, condi- tional on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, was 2.2 percent, a bit above the median estimate of its longer-run rate of 1.9 percent. Almost all participants continued to expect GDP growth to slow over the projection period, with the median projection at 2.0 percent in 2020, 1.9 percent in 2021, and 1.8 per- cent in 2022. Relative to the June SEP, the medians of the projections for real GDP growth in 2019, 2020, 2021, and the longer run were unchanged or revised slightly higher. The median of projections for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2019 was 3.7 percent, ½ percentage point below the median assessment of its longer-run level of 4.2 percent. The medians of projections for 2020, 2021, and 2022 were 3.7 percent, 3.8 percent, and 3.9 percent, respectively. The median projected unem- ployment rate for 2019 was slightly higher than in the June SEP, while the median projected unemployment rates for 2020 and 2021 were unchanged relative to the June SEP. A vast majority of participants who submit- ted longer-run projections expected that the unemploy- ment rate in 2022 would be below their estimates of its longer-run level, with some participants projecting a gap of ½ percentage point or more. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- ployment rate, respectively, from 2019 to 2022 and in the longer run. The distribution of individual projec- tions for real GDP growth for 2019 shifted up some- what relative to that in the June SEP. The distributions of individual projections of real GDP growth for 2020 and 2021 and for the longer run were little changed over- all. The distributions of individual projections for the unemployment rate for 2019 to 2021 and for the longer run were also little changed overall relative to those in June. The Outlook for Inflation As shown in table 1, the median of projections for total PCE price inflation was 1.5 percent in 2019, 1.9 percent in 2020, and 2.0 percent in 2021; these medians were un- changed from June. For 2022, the median projection for total PCE was 2.0 percent. The medians of projections for core PCE price inflation were 1.8 percent for 2019 and 1.9 percent for 2020. The median projections for core inflation for 2021 and 2022 were 2.0 percent. These medians were also unchanged from June for each year included in the June SEP. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri- butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in- flation. The distributions of projections for total and core PCE price inflation in 2019, 2020, and 2021 were little changed overall relative to those in June. For 2022, all participants projected total and core inflation between 1.8 and 2.2 percent. Appropriate Monetary Policy Figure 3.E shows distributions of participants’ judg- ments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2019 to 2022 and over the longer run. Compared with the June projections, the range of pro- jections for 2019, 2020, and 2021 shifted toward lower values and narrowed somewhat. The vast majority of participants viewed the appropriate levels of the federal funds rate at the end of 2019, 2020, and 2021 as lower than those that they deemed appropriate in June. All participants lowered their projections for the appropri- ate level of the federal funds rate, relative to June, at some point in the projection period, and none raised their projections for the federal funds rate for any year. Compared with the projections prepared for the June SEP, the median federal funds rate was 50 basis points lower in 2019 and 25 basis points lower in 2020 and 2021. Muted inflation pressures, slower global growth, and weak business fixed investment were cited as rea- sons for downward revisions to the appropriate path for the federal funds rate, as were trade tensions and risk- management considerations. The median federal funds rate projection for the end of 2019 was 1.88 percent. Seven participants assessed that the most likely appropriate federal funds rate at the end of 2019 was 1.63 percent, while five assessed that the most likely appropriate rate at year-end was 2.13 percent. The median for 2020 was 1.88 percent, equal to the me- dian for 2019. For subsequent years, the medians of the projections were 2.13 percent at the end of 2021 and 2.38 percent at the end of 2022. Some participants re- vised lower their estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate, while a majority of participants’ esti- mates were unchanged. The median estimate of the longer-run federal funds rate was 2.50 percent, un- changed from the median estimate in June. Uncertainty and Risks In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of Page 6 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2019-22 and over the longer run Number of participants 2019 September projections June projections 1.4− 1.5 1.6− 1.7 1.8− 1.9 2.0− 2.1 2.2− 2.3 2.4− 2.5 Percent range Number of participants 2020 2021 2022 1.4− 1.5 1.6− 1.7 1.8− 1.9 2.0− 2.1 2.2− 2.3 2.4− 2.5 Percent range Number of participants 1.4− 1.5 1.6− 1.7 1.8− 1.9 2.0− 2.1 2.2− 2.3 2.4− 2.5 Percent range Number of participants 1.4− 1.5 1.6− 1.7 1.8− 1.9 2.0− 2.1 2.2− 2.3 2.4− 2.5 Percent range Number of participants Longer run 1.4− 1.5 1.6− 1.7 1.8− 1.9 2.0− 2.1 2.2− 2.3 2.4− 2.5 Percent range Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Page 7 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2019-22 and over the longer run Number of participants 2019 September projections June projections 3.2− 3.3 3.4− 3.5 3.6− 3.7 3.8− 3.9 4.0− 4.1 Percent range 4.2− 4.3 4.4− 4.5 4.6− 4.7 Number of participants 2020 3.2− 3.3 3.4− 3.5 3.6− 3.7 3.8− 3.9 4.0− 4.1 Percent range 4.2− 4.3 4.4− 4.5 4.6− 4.7 Number of participants 2021 3.2− 3.3 3.4− 3.5 3.6− 3.7 3.8− 3.9 4.0− 4.1 Percent range 4.2− 4.3 4.4− 4.5 4.6− 4.7 Number of participants 2022 3.2− 3.3 3.4− 3.5 3.6− 3.7 3.8− 3.9 4.0− 4.1 Percent range 4.2− 4.3 4.4− 4.5 4.6− 4.7 Number of participants Longer run 3.2− 3.3 3.4− 3.5 3.6− 3.7 3.8− 3.9 4.0− 4.1 Percent range 4.2− 4.3 4.4− 4.5 4.6− 4.7 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Page 8 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2019-22 and over the longer run Number of participants 2019 September projections June projections 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 2020 2021 2022 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 Percent range Number of participants Longer run 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 Percent range Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Page 9 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂation, 2019-22 2019 September projections June projections Number of participants 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 2020 2021 2022 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 Percent range Number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 Percent range Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. Page 10 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2019-22 and over the longer run Number of participants 2019 September projections June projections 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 Percent range 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 3.13− 3.37 3.38− 3.62 Number of participants 2020 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 Percent range 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 3.13− 3.37 3.38− 3.62 Number of participants 2021 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 Percent range 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 3.13− 3.37 3.38− 3.62 Number of participants 2022 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 Percent range 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 3.13− 3.37 3.38− 3.62 Number of participants Longer run 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 Percent range 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 3.13− 3.37 3.38− 3.62 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Page 11 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast errors of various private and government forecasts over the past 20 years—for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are rep- resented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts dis- play the SEP medians for the three variables surrounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the degree of un- certainty attending these projections is similar to the typ- ical magnitude of past forecast errors and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 per- cent probability of being within these confidence inter- vals. For all three variables, this measure of uncertainty is substantial and generally increases as the forecast hori- zon lengthens. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- rounding their individual economic projections are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Most participants continued to view the uncertain- ties around their forecasts for GDP growth, total infla- tion, and core inflation as broadly similar to the average over the past 20 years. Just over half of the participants viewed the level of uncertainty around their unemploy- ment rate projections as being similar to the average of the past 20 years, while the rest of the participants viewed uncertainty as higher.2 Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric around the median projections, they do not reflect any asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess- ments of the balance of risks to their current economic projections are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig- ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Most participants continued to view the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and for the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside. Most participants—four more than in the June SEP—judged the risks to the in- flation outlook as broadly balanced; some participants viewed the risks to inflation as weighted to the downside, and no participants assessed risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Variable 2019 2020 2021 2022 Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.2 ±1.8 ±1.9 ±2.0 Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.3 ±1.1 ±1.6 ±2.0 Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.0 Short-term interest rates3 . . . ±0.5 ±1.7 ±2.2 ±2.7 NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1999 through 2018 that were released in the fall by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump- tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Us- ing Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx. doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, several participants mentioned trade developments, concerns about foreign economic growth, and weaker business fixed investment as sources of uncertainty or downside risk to the U.S. economic growth outlook. For the inflation outlook, the possibil- ity that inflation expectations could be drifting below levels consistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective and the potential for weaker domestic demand to put downward pressure on inflation were viewed as downside risks. A few participants noted the possibility that higher tariffs could lead to aggregate price pressure as a source of upside risk to inflation. A number of par- ticipants mentioned that their assessments of risks re- mained roughly balanced, in part because the downward revisions to their appropriate path for the federal funds rate were offsetting factors that would otherwise con- tribute to asymmetric risks. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the federal 2 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici- pants’ projections. Page 12 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.A. Uncertainty and risks in projections of GDP growth Median projection and conﬁdence interval based on historical forecast errors Change in real GDP Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 4 3 2 1 0 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about GDP growth September projections June projections Risks to GDP growth September projections June projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 13 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.B. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the unemployment rate Median projection and conﬁdence interval based on historical forecast errors Unemployment rate Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate Number of participants Number of participants September projections June projections September projections June projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 14 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.C. Uncertainty and risks in projections of PCE inﬂation Median projection and conﬁdence interval based on historical forecast errors PCE inflation Median of projections 70% confidence interval Actual Percent 3 2 1 0 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about PCE inflation September projections June projections Risks to PCE inflation September projections June projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Number of participants Number of participants Uncertainty about core PCE inflation September projections June projections Risks to core PCE inflation September projections June projections 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 Lower Broadly similar Higher Weighted to downside Broadly balanced Weighted to upside Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Page 15 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ funds rate in response to actual and prospective devel- opments over time in key economic variables—such as real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion—uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the federal funds rate importantly reflects the uncertain- ties about the paths for these economic variables, along with other factors. Figure 5 provides a graphic represen- tation of this uncertainty, plotting the SEP median for the federal funds rate surrounded by confidence inter- vals derived from the results presented in table 2.3 As with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncer- tainty surrounding the appropriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial and increases for longer hori- zons. 3 The confidence interval for the federal funds rate is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero, which is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. Page 16 Federal Open Market Committee _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 5. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the federal funds rate Federal funds rate Midpoint of target range Median of projections 70% confidence interval* Actual 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Percent 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The conﬁdence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to oﬀset the eﬀects of shocks to the economy. The conﬁdence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero - the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The conﬁdence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent conﬁdence interval if the conﬁdence interval has been truncated at zero. Page 17 Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 17–18, 2019 _____________________________________________________________________________________________ Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- tial costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.8 to 4.2 percent in the current year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the second year, 1.1 to 4.9 percent in the third year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the fourth year. The corre- sponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall infla- tion would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second year, 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unem- ployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; fur- thermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig- ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par- ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summa- rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone- tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac- tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri- ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee October 29–30, 2019 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 29, 2019, at 9:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, October 30, 2019, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Richard H. Clarida Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Randal K. Quarles Eric Rosengren Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Eric Belsky,2 Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors; Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jennifer J. Burns, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Trevor A. Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Board Members, Board of Governors Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, Anna Paulson, Christopher J. Waller, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager pro tem, System Open Market Account 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended the discussion of the review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Brian M. Doyle, Wendy E. Dunn, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and Ivan Vidangos, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 3 Attended through the discussion of the review of options for repo operations to support control of the federal funds rate. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Michael Hsu,4 Associate Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; David López-Salido and Min Wei, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Glenn Follette, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,3 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Paul R. Wood,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Eric C. Engstrom, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, and Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Stephanie E. Curcuru, Assistant Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Giovanni Favara, Laura Lipscomb,4 Zeynep Senyuz,4 and Rebecca Zarutskie,2 Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Shane M. Sherlund, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,5 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors; Matthew Malloy,4 Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mark A. Carlson,3 Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Principal Economists, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Valerie Hinojosa, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Kelly J. Dubbert, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Jeffrey Fuhrer, and Glenn D. Rudebusch, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Boston, and San Francisco, respectively Angela O’Connor,4 Marc Giannoni,2 Paolo A. Pesenti, Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl,4 Raymond Testa,4 and Nathaniel Wuerffel,4 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Dallas, New York, Chicago, New York, and New York, respectively Satyajit Chatterjee, Richard K. Crump,6 George A. Kahn, Rebecca McCaughrin,4 and Patricia Zobel,7 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, Kansas City, New York, and New York, respectively Larry Wall,2 Executive Director, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Edward S. Prescott, Senior Economic and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau,6 Senior Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Stefania D’Amico2 and Thomas B. King,2 Senior Economists and Research Advisors, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Alex Richter, Senior Research Economist and Advisor, Alyssa G. Anderson,4 Anna Orlik, and Bernd Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Schlusche,2 Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Cristina Fuentes-Albero2 and Christopher J. Nekarda,6 Benjamin Malin, Senior Research Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 4 Attended the discussion of developments in financial mar- kets and open market operations through the discussion of the review of options for repo operations to support control of the federal funds rate. 5 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. 6 Attended the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. 7 Attended the discussion of developments in financial mar- kets and open market operations through the end of the meet- ing. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices Committee participants continued their discussions re- lated to the ongoing review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Staff briefings provided an assessment of a range of monetary policy tools that the Committee could employ to provide additional economic stimulus and bolster inflation outcomes, particularly in future epi- sodes in which the policy rate would be constrained by the effective lower bound (ELB). The staff first dis- cussed policy rate tools, focusing on three forms of for- ward guidance—qualitative, which provides a nonspe- cific indication of the expected duration of accommoda- tion; date-based, which specifies a date beyond which accommodation could start to be reduced; and outcome- based, which ties the possible start of a reduction of ac- commodation to the achievement of certain macroeco- nomic outcomes. The briefing addressed communica- tions challenges associated with each form of forward guidance, including the need to avoid conveying a more negative economic outlook than the FOMC expects. Nonetheless, the staff suggested that forward guidance generally had been effective in easing financial condi- tions and stimulating economic activity in circumstances when the policy rate was above the ELB and when it was at the ELB. The briefing also discussed negative interest rates, a policy option implemented by several foreign central banks. The staff noted that although the evi- dence so far suggested that this tool had provided ac- commodation in jurisdictions where it had been em- ployed, there were also indications of possible adverse side effects. Moreover, differences between the U.S. fi- nancial system and the financial systems of those juris- dictions suggested that the foreign experience may not provide a useful guide in assessing whether negative rates would be effective in the United States. The second part of the staff briefing focused on balance sheet policy tools. The staff discussed the benefits and costs associated with the large-scale asset purchase pro- grams implemented by the Federal Reserve after the fi- nancial crisis. In general, the staff’s review of the histor- ical experience suggested that the benefits of large-scale asset purchase programs were significant and that many of the potential costs of such programs identified at the time either did not materialize or materialized to a smaller degree than initially feared. In addition, the staff presentation noted that—taking account of investor ex- pectations ahead of the announcement of each new pro- gram—the effects of asset purchases did not appear to have diminished materially across consecutive programs. However, going forward, such policies might not be as effective because longer-term interest rates would likely be much lower at the onset of a future asset purchase program than they were before the financial crisis. The staff also compared the benefits and costs associated with asset purchase programs that are of a fixed cumu- lative size and those that are flow-based—where pur- chases continue at a specific pace until certain macroe- conomic outcomes are achieved—and examined the po- tential effectiveness of using asset purchases to place ceilings on interest rates. The briefing also discussed lending programs that could facilitate the flow of credit to households or businesses. Participants discussed the relative merits of qualitative, date-based, and outcome-based forward guidance. A number of participants noted that each of these three forms of forward guidance could be effective in provid- ing accommodation, depending on circumstances both at and away from the ELB. They also suggested that different types of forward guidance would likely be needed to address varying economic conditions, and that the communications regarding forward guidance needed to be tailored to explain the Committee’s evaluation of the economic outlook. In particular, several participants emphasized that to guard against the possibility of ad- verse feedback loops in which forward guidance is inter- preted by the public as a sign of a sharply deteriorating economic outlook, thus leading households and busi- nesses to become even more cautious in their spending decisions, the Committee would need to clearly com- municate how its announced policy could help promote better economic outcomes. Participants saw both ben- efits and costs associated with outcome-based forward guidance relative to other forms of forward guidance. On the one hand, relative to qualitative or date-based forward guidance, outcome-based forward guidance has the advantage of creating an explicit link between future monetary policy actions and macroeconomic conditions, thereby helping to support economic stabilization ef- forts and foster transparency and accountability. On the other hand, outcome-based forward guidance could be complex and difficult to explain and, hence, could po- tentially be less effective than qualitative or date-based forward guidance if those hurdles could not be over- come. A few participants commented that outcome- based forward guidance, tied to inflation outcomes, could be a useful tool to reinforce the Committee’s com- mitment to its symmetric 2 percent objective. Participants also discussed the benefits and costs of us- ing different types of balance sheet policy. Participants _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of October 29–30, 2019Page 3 generally agreed that the balance sheet policies imple- mented by the Federal Reserve after the crisis had eased financial conditions and had contributed to the eco- nomic recovery, and that those tools had become an im- portant part of the Committee’s current toolkit. How- ever, some participants pointed out that research had produced a sizable range of estimates of the magnitude of the economic effects of balance sheet actions. In ad- dition, some participants noted that the effectiveness of these tools might be diminished in the future, as longer- term interest rates have declined to very low levels and would likely be even lower following an adverse shock that could lead to the resumption of large-scale asset purchases; as a result, there might be limited scope for balance sheet tools to provide accommodation. Several participants commented on the advantages and disad- vantages of flow-based asset purchase programs tied to the achievement of economic outcomes. On the one hand, such programs adjusted automatically in response to the performance of the economy and, hence, were more straightforward to implement and communicate. On the other hand, flow-based asset purchase programs may result in the balance sheet rising to undesirable lev- els. A few participants also commented that, barring sig- nificant dislocations to particular segments of the mar- kets, they would restrict asset purchases to Treasury se- curities to avoid perceptions that the Federal Reserve was engaging in credit allocation across sectors of the economy. In considering policy tools that the Federal Reserve had not used in the recent past, participants discussed the benefits and costs of using balance sheet tools to cap rates on short- or long-maturity Treasury securities through open market operations as necessary. A few participants saw benefits to capping longer-term interest rates that more directly influence household and busi- ness spending. In addition, capping longer-maturity in- terest rates using balance sheet tools, if judged as credi- ble by market participants, might require a smaller amount of asset purchases to provide a similar amount of accommodation as a quantity-based program pur- chasing longer-maturity securities. However, many par- ticipants raised concerns about capping long-term rates. Some of those participants noted that uncertainty re- garding the neutral federal funds rate and regarding the effects of rate ceiling policies on future interest rates and inflation made it difficult to determine the appropriate level of the rate ceiling or when that ceiling should be removed; that maintaining a rate ceiling could result in an elevated level of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet or significant volatility in its size or maturity composi- tion; or that managing longer-term interest rates might be seen as interacting with the federal debt management process. By contrast, a majority of participants saw greater benefits in using balance sheet tools to cap shorter-term interest rates and reinforce forward guid- ance about the near-term path of the policy rate. All participants judged that negative interest rates cur- rently did not appear to be an attractive monetary policy tool in the United States. Participants commented that there was limited scope to bring the policy rate into neg- ative territory, that the evidence on the beneficial effects of negative interest rates abroad was mixed, and that it was unclear what effects negative rates might have on the willingness of financial intermediaries to lend and on the spending plans of households and businesses. Par- ticipants noted that negative interest rates would entail risks of introducing significant complexity or distortions to the financial system. In particular, some participants cautioned that the financial system in the United States is considerably different from those in countries that im- plemented negative interest rate policies, and that nega- tive rates could have more significant adverse effects on market functioning and financial stability here than abroad. Notwithstanding these considerations, partici- pants did not rule out the possibility that circumstances could arise in which it might be appropriate to reassess the potential role of negative interest rates as a policy tool. Overall, participants generally agreed that the forward guidance and balance sheet policies followed by the Fed- eral Reserve after the financial crisis had been effective in providing stimulus at the ELB. With estimates of equilibrium real interest rates having declined notably over recent decades, policymakers saw less room to re- duce the federal funds rate to support the economy in the event of a downturn. In addition, against a back- ground of inflation undershooting the symmetric 2 per- cent objective for several years, some participants raised the concern that the scope to reduce the federal funds rate to provide support to economic activity in future recessions could be reduced further if inflation shortfalls continued and led to a decline in inflation expectations. Therefore, participants generally agreed it was important for the Committee to keep a wide range of tools available and employ them as appropriate to support the econ- omy. Doing so would help ensure the anchoring of in- flation expectations at a level consistent with the Com- mittee’s symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Some participants noted that the form of the policy re- sponse would depend critically on the circumstances the Committee faced at the time. Several participants sug- gested that communicating to the public clearly and con- vincingly in advance about how the Committee intended to provide accommodation at the ELB would enhance public confidence and support the effectiveness of whichever tool the Committee selected. Some partici- pants thought it would be helpful for the Committee to evaluate how its tools could be utilized in different eco- nomic scenarios, such as when longer-term interest rates were significantly below current levels, and discuss which actions would best address the challenges posed by each scenario. Several participants noted that, partic- ularly if monetary policy became severely constrained at the ELB, expansionary fiscal policy would be especially important in addressing an economic downturn. Participants expected that, at upcoming meetings, they would continue their deliberations on the Committee’s review of the monetary policy framework as well as the Committee’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Mon- etary Policy Strategy. They also generally agreed that the Committee’s consideration of possible modifications to its policy strategy, tools, and communication practices would take some time and that the process would be careful, deliberate, and patient. A number of partici- pants judged that the review could be completed around the middle of 2020. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The manager pro tem first reviewed developments in fi- nancial markets over the intermeeting period. Early in the period, market participants focused on signs of weakness in U.S. economic data with some soft data from business surveys viewed as substantiating concerns that global headwinds were spilling over to the U.S. economy. Later in the period, markets responded to news suggesting favorable developments around Brexit and a partial U.S.-China trade deal. On balance, U.S. fi- nancial conditions ended the period little changed. Regarding the outlook for U.S. monetary policy, the Open Market Desk’s surveys and market-based indica- tors pointed to a high likelihood of a 25 basis point cut in the target range at the October meeting. The proba- bility that survey respondents placed on this outcome was broadly similar to the probability of a 25 basis point cut ahead of the July and September meetings. Further ahead, the path implied by the medians of survey re- spondents’ modal forecasts for the federal funds rate re- mained essentially flat after this meeting. Meanwhile, the market-implied path suggested that investors expected around 25 basis points of additional easing by the end of 2020, after the anticipated easing at this meeting. The manager pro tem next turned to a review of money market developments since early October. On Octo- ber 11, the Committee announced its decision to main- tain reserves at or above the level that prevailed in early September through a program of Treasury bill purchases and repurchase agreement (repo) operations. After the announcement, the Desk conducted regular operations that offered at least $75 billion in overnight repo funding and between $135 and $170 billion in term funding. These operations fostered conditions that helped main- tain the federal funds rate within the target range through two channels. First, they provided funding in repo markets that dampened repo market pressure that would otherwise have passed through to the federal funds market, and second, they increased the supply of reserves in the banking system. In anticipation of an- other projected sharp decline in reserves and expected rate pressures around October 31, the Desk announced an increase in the size of overnight repos to $120 billion, and an increase in the size of the two term repo opera- tions that crossed the October month-end to $45 billion. With respect to purchases of Treasury bills for reserve management purposes, the Desk had purchased more than half of the initial $60 billion monthly amount for October, and propositions at the five operations con- ducted to date had been strong. Respondents to the Desk surveys expected reserve management purchases of Treasury bills to continue at the same pace for some time. The combination of repo operations and bill pur- chases lifted reserve levels above those observed in early September. The manager pro tem noted that diminished willingness of some dealers to intermediate across money markets ahead of the year-end could result in upward pressure on short-term money market rates. Forward measures of market pricing continued to indicate expectations for such pressures around the year-end. The Desk planned to continue its close monitoring of reserves and money market conditions, as well as dealer participation in repo operations, particularly given balance sheet constraints heading into year-end. The Desk discussed its intentions to further adjust operations around year-end as needed to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation, and to maintain over time a level of reserve balances at or above those that prevailed in early September. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of October 29–30, 2019Page 5 The manager pro tem finished by noting that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York would soon release a request for public comment on a plan to publish a series of back- ward looking Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) averages and a daily SOFR index to support the transi- tion away from instruments based on LIBOR (London interbank offered rate). Publication of these series was expected to begin in the first half of 2020. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Review of Options for Repo Operations to Support Control of the Federal Funds Rate The staff briefed participants on the recent experience with using repo operations to support control of the fed- eral funds rate and on possibly maintaining a role for repo operations in the monetary policy implementation framework over the longer run. Ongoing capacity for repo operations could be viewed as useful in an ample- reserves regime as a way of providing insurance against unexpected stresses in money markets that could drive the federal funds rate outside the Committee’s target range over a sustained period. The staff presented two potential approaches for conducting repo operations if the Committee decided to maintain an ongoing role for such operations. Under the first approach, the Desk would conduct modestly sized, relatively frequent repo operations designed to provide a high degree of readi- ness should the need for larger operations arise; under the second approach, the FOMC would establish a standing fixed-rate facility that could serve as an auto- matic money market stabilizer.8 Assessing these two ap- proaches involved several considerations, including the degree of assurance of control over the federal funds rate, the likelihood that participation in the Federal Re- serve’s repo operations could become stigmatized, the possibility that the operations could encourage the Fed- eral Reserve’s counterparties to take on excessive liquid- ity risks in their portfolios, and the potential disinterme- diation of financial transactions currently undertaken by private counterparties. Regular, modestly sized repo op- erations likely would pose relatively little risk of stigma or moral hazard, but they may provide less assurance of control over the federal funds rate because it might be difficult for the Federal Reserve to anticipate money 8 The staff briefed the Committee in June 2019 on the possible role of a standing repo facility in the monetary policy imple- mentation framework. market pressures and scale up its repo operations ac- cordingly. A standing fixed-rate repo facility would likely provide substantial assurance of control over the federal funds rate, but use of the facility could become stigmatized, particularly if the rate was set at a relatively high level. Conversely, a standing facility with a rate set at a relatively low level could result in larger and more frequent repo operations than would be appropriate. And by effectively standing ready to provide a form of liquidity on an as-needed basis, such a facility could in- crease the risk that some institutions may take on an un- desirably high amount of liquidity risk. In their comments following the staff presentation, par- ticipants emphasized the importance of maintaining re- serves at a level consistent with the Committee’s choice of an ample-reserves monetary policy implementation framework, in which control over the level of the federal funds rate is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve’s administered rates and in which active management of the supply of reserves is not re- quired. Some participants indicated that, in such an en- vironment, they would have some tolerance for allowing the federal funds rate to vary from day to day and to move occasionally outside its target range, especially in those instances associated with easily identifiable tech- nical events; a couple of participants expressed discom- fort with such misses. Participants expressed a range of views on the relative merits of the two approaches described by the staff for conducting repo operations. Many participants noted that, once an ample supply of reserves is firmly estab- lished, there might be little need for a standing repo fa- cility or for frequent repo operations. Some of these participants indicated that a basic principle in imple- menting an ample-reserves framework is to maintain re- serves on an ongoing basis at levels that would obviate the need for open market operations to address pres- sures in funding markets in all but exceptional circum- stances. Many participants remarked, however, that even in an environment with ample reserves, a standing facility could serve as a useful backstop to support con- trol of the federal funds rate in the event of outsized shocks to the system. Several of these participants also suggested that, if a standing facility were created that al- lowed banks to monetize a portion of their securities holdings at times of market stress, banks could possibly reduce their demand for reserves in normal times, which Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ could make it feasible for the monetary policy imple- mentation framework to operate with a significantly smaller quantity of reserves than would otherwise be needed. A couple of participants pointed out that estab- lishing a standing facility would be similar to the practice of some other major central banks. A number of partic- ipants noted that, before deciding whether to implement a standing repo facility, additional work would be neces- sary to assess the likely implications of different design choices for a standing repo facility, such as pricing, eligi- ble counterparties, and the set of acceptable collateral. Echoing issues raised at the Committee’s June 2019 meeting, various participants commented on the need to carefully evaluate these design choices to guard against the potential for moral hazard, stigma, disintermediation risk, or excessive volatility in the Federal Reserve’s bal- ance sheet. A couple of other participants suggested that an approach based on modestly sized, frequent repo op- erations that could be quickly and substantially ramped up in response to emerging market pressures would mit- igate the moral hazard, disintermediation, and stigmati- zation risks associated with a standing repo facility. Participants made no decisions at this meeting on the longer-run role of repo operations in the ample-reserves regime or on an approach for conducting repo opera- tions over the longer run. They generally agreed that they should continue to monitor the market effects of the Federal Reserve’s ongoing repo operations and Treasury bill purchases and that additional analysis of the recent period of money market dislocations or of fluctu- ations in the Federal Reserve’s non-reserve liabilities was warranted. Some participants called for further research on the role that the financial regulatory environment or other factors may have played in the recent dislocations. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available for the October 29–30 meet- ing indicated that labor market conditions remained strong and that real gross domestic product (GDP) in- creased at a moderate rate in the third quarter. Con- sumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month per- centage change in the price index for personal consump- tion expenditures (PCE), remained below 2 percent in August. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a slower pace in September than in the previous two months, but the average pace for the third quarter was similar to that for the first half of the year. However, the pace of job gains so far this year was slower than last year, even after accounting for the anticipated effects of the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ benchmark revision to payroll employ- ment, which will be incorporated in the published data in February 2020. The unemployment rate moved down to a 50-year low of 3.5 percent in September, while the labor force participation rate held steady and the em- ployment-to-population ratio moved up. The unem- ployment rates for Asians, Hispanics, and whites each moved lower in September, but the rate for African Americans was unchanged; the unemployment rate for each group was below its level at the end of the previous economic expansion, though persistent differentials be- tween these rates remained. The average share of work- ers employed part time for economic reasons in Septem- ber continued to be below its level in late 2007. The rate of private-sector job openings declined in August, and the rate of quits also edged down, but both readings were still at relatively elevated levels. The four-week moving average of initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits through mid-October remained near historically low levels. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 2.9 percent over the 12 months ending in Septem- ber, roughly similar to the pace a year earlier. Total consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in August. Core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) was 1.8 percent over that same 12-month period, while con- sumer food price inflation was well below core inflation, and consumer energy prices declined. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation con- structed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas remained at 2 percent in August. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 1.7 percent over the 12 months ending in Septem- ber, while core CPI inflation was 2.4 percent. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run infla- tion expectations—including those from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the Blue Chip Eco- nomic Indicators, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little changed, on balance, although the Michigan survey measure ticked down to the low end of its recent range. Real PCE rose solidly in the third quarter following a stronger gain in the second quarter. Overall consumer spending rose steadily in recent months, and sales of light motor vehicles through September maintained their robust second-quarter pace. Key factors that influence consumer spending—including the low unemployment rate, further gains in real disposable income, high levels of households’ net worth, and generally low borrowing rates—were supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. The Michigan survey measure of consumer _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of October 29–30, 2019Page 7 sentiment rose again in October and had mostly recov- ered from its August slump, while the Conference Board survey measure of consumer confidence remained at a favorable level. Real residential investment turned up solidly in the third quarter following six consecutive quarters of contrac- tion. This upturn was consistent with the rise in single- family starts in the third quarter, and building permits for such units—which tend to be a good indicator for the underlying trend in the construction of such homes—also increased. Both new and existing home sales increased, on net, in August and September. Taken together, the data on construction and sales suggested that the decline in mortgage rates since late 2018 was starting to show through to housing activity. Real nonresidential private fixed investment declined further in the third quarter. Nominal shipments of non- defense capital goods excluding aircraft decreased over August and September, and forward-looking indicators generally pointed to continued softness in business equipment spending. Orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft decreased over those two months and were still below the level of shipments, most measures of business sentiment deteriorated, analysts’ expectations of firms’ longer-term profit growth de- clined somewhat further, and concerns about trade de- velopments continued to weigh on firms’ investment de- cisions. Business expenditures for nonresidential struc- tures decreased markedly further in the third quarter, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in op- eration—an indicator of business spending for struc- tures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to de- cline through mid-October. Industrial production declined in September and was notably lower than at the beginning of the year. Produc- tion in September was held down by the strike at Gen- eral Motors, and automakers’ schedules indicated that assemblies of light motor vehicles would remain low in October before rebounding in November. Overall man- ufacturing production appeared likely to remain soft in coming months, reflecting generally weak readings on new orders from national and regional manufacturing surveys, declining domestic business investment, weak GDP growth abroad, and a persistent drag from trade developments. Total real government purchases rose at a slower pace in the third quarter than in the second quarter. Real federal purchases decelerated, reflecting smaller increases in both defense and nondefense spending. Federal hiring of temporary workers for next year’s decennial census was quite modest during the quarter. Real purchases by state and local governments also rose at a slower pace, as the boost from a faster expansion in state and local payrolls was partially offset by a decrease in real con- struction spending by these governments. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in August, reflecting a subdued pace of export growth and a moderate pace of import growth. Export growth was subdued due to lackluster exports of services and capital goods. Advance estimates for September suggested that goods imports fell more than exports, pointing to a nar- rowing of the monthly trade deficit. The Bureau of Eco- nomic Analysis estimated that net exports made a slight negative contribution to real GDP growth in the third quarter. Incoming data suggested that growth in the foreign economies remained subpar in the third quarter. In sev- eral advanced foreign economies (AFEs), indicators showed continued weakness in the manufacturing sec- tor, especially in the euro area and the United Kingdom. Similarly, GDP growth remained subdued in China and several other emerging economies in Asia, and indicators suggested that growth in Latin America also remained weak. Foreign inflation appeared to have moderated a bit in the third quarter, reflecting declines in energy prices. Inflation remained relatively low in most foreign economies. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investor sentiment weakened over the early part of the intermeeting period, reflecting a few weaker-than-ex- pected domestic data releases, but later strengthened on increased optimism regarding ongoing trade negotia- tions between the United States and China and positive Brexit news. On net, equity prices and corporate bond spreads were little changed, and the Treasury yield curve steepened a bit. Financing conditions for businesses and households remained generally supportive of spending and economic activity. September FOMC communications were viewed as slightly less accommodative than expected, with inves- tors reportedly surprised by the Summary of Economic Projections showing that a majority of FOMC partici- pants anticipated no further easing this year. Incoming data early in the intermeeting period—particularly the disappointing readings on business activity—prompted a decline in the market-implied path for the policy rate, but that decline was later partly reversed as market par- ticipants apparently grew more optimistic on the pro- spects for a U.S.–China trade deal and Brexit negotia- tions. Late in the period, quotes on federal funds futures Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ options contracts indicated that market participants as- signed a very high probability to a 25 basis point reduc- tion in the target range of the federal funds rate at the October FOMC meeting. In addition, market-implied expectations for the federal funds rate at year-end and next year moved down. Yields on nominal U.S. Treasury securities moved down in the early part of the intermeeting period but later re- traced their declines. On net, the Treasury yield curve steepened a bit, mostly reflecting a modest decline in short-term yields. Measures of inflation compensation over the next 5 years and 5 to 10 years ahead based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities inched down and remained near multiyear low levels. Broad stock price indexes fell by as much as 4 percent during the first half of the intermeeting period but re- covered afterward, ending the period roughly un- changed. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 in- dex declined slightly and ended the period below the middle of its historical distribution. On net, corporate credit spreads were little changed. Domestic short-term funding markets were volatile in mid-September and exhibited additional, albeit modest, pressures around the September quarter-end and the mid-October Treasury settlement date. These pressures were alleviated in part by the Desk’s overnight and term repo operations that began on September 17. After smoothing through rate volatility over the period, inter- est rates for overnight unsecured and secured funding declined roughly in line with the reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate at the September FOMC meeting and the associated 30 basis point decrease in the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate. The effective federal funds rate (EFFR) was more volatile than usual over the intermeeting period, with the EFFR–IOER spread ranging between 2 basis points and 10 basis points. Rates on overnight commercial paper (CP) and short-term negotiable certificates of deposit declined fairly quickly following the announcement of Desk op- erations on September 17, although some CP rates re- mained elevated into October. The FOMC’s Octo- ber 11 announcement of Treasury bill purchases and repo operations to maintain reserves at or above their early-September level appeared to improve expectations about funding market conditions through the remainder of the year. These communications reportedly did not materially affect yields on longer-term Treasury securi- ties. Financial markets in the AFEs followed a pattern similar to that seen in the United States. AFE financial condi- tions tightened early in the intermeeting period on dis- appointing activity data, both in the United States and abroad, and subsequently recovered on perceived better prospects for trade and Brexit negotiations. Movements in the exchange value of the dollar against most curren- cies were relatively modest, and the broad dollar index declined slightly. Relative to the dollar, the British pound appreciated on Brexit developments, and the Ar- gentinian peso continued to depreciate amid the coun- try’s political developments. The mid-September increases in U.S. Treasury repo rates spilled over to borrowing rates in the international dollar funding market. However, the measures taken by the Federal Reserve to keep the federal funds rate in the tar- get range also calmed dollar funding conditions in the foreign exchange swap market. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses re- mained generally accommodative during the intermeet- ing period. Gross issuance of corporate bonds, which was strong in September, experienced a typical seasonal decline in October. Gross issuance of institutional lev- eraged loans remained solid but slightly below 2019 monthly averages. Meanwhile, growth of commercial and industrial (C&I) loans at banks was modest in the third quarter as a whole. Respondents to the October 2019 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) reported that borrower de- mand weakened for C&I loans over the third quarter, while lending standards on such loans were about un- changed. Gross equity issuance through both initial and seasoned offerings picked up to a strong pace in Septem- ber but moderated in October. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations deteriorated slightly in recent months but remained solid on balance. Credit condi- tions for both small businesses and municipalities stayed accommodative on net. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions also remained generally accommodative. The volume of agency and non-agency commercial mort- gage-backed securities issuance was strong in Septem- ber, in part supported by recent declines in interest rates. Growth of CRE loans on banks’ books was little changed in the third quarter. Banks in the October SLOOS reported tighter lending standards for all types of CRE loans; they also reported weaker demand for construction lending and stronger demand for the other CRE lending categories. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of October 29–30, 2019Page 9 Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative on balance. Mortgage rates were little changed since the September FOMC meeting and stayed near their lowest level since mid-2016. In remained September, home-purchase originations around the relatively high level seen during the previous two months, while refinancing originations jumped to their highest level since late 2012. In the October SLOOS, banks left their lending standards basically un- changed for most residential real estate loan categories over the third quarter. However, for subprime loans, a moderate net percentage of banks reported tightening standards. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re- mained generally supportive of household spending, al- though conditions continued to be tight for credit card borrowers with nonprime credit scores. Interest rates on auto loans fell, on net, since the beginning of the year, and interest rates on credit card accounts leveled off through August. According to the October SLOOS, commercial banks tightened their standards on credit cards and other consumer loans over the third quarter. Additionally, banks reported that their standards on auto loans and their willingness to make consumer install- ment loans were about unchanged on balance. The staff provided an update on its assessments of po- tential risks to financial stability. On balance, the staff characterized the financial vulnerabilities of the U.S. fi- nancial system as moderate. The staff judged that, for many asset classes, valuation pressures eased over the past year. Appetite for risk in the leveraged loan market remained elevated, but less so than last year, especially for lower-rated loans. In addition, CRE prices remained high relative to rental income. In assessing vulnerabili- ties stemming from borrowing in the household and business sectors, the staff noted that, while household borrowing continued to decline relative to nominal GDP, business leverage remained at or near record-high levels. The risks associated with leverage at financial in- stitutions were viewed as being low, as they have been for some time, largely because of high capital ratios at large banks. Nonetheless, the staff noted that the resili- ence of financial institutions could be undermined by low interest rates and banks’ announced plans to in- crease payouts to shareholders. The staff assessed vul- nerabilities stemming from funding risk as modest. In addition, the staff discussed the potential for liquidity transformation by open-ended mutual funds investing in bank loans to lead to market dislocations under stress scenarios, while noting that outflows from such funds have not often been associated with such dislocations. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. real GDP growth prepared by the staff for the October FOMC meeting was revised down a little for the second half of this year relative to the previous projection. This revision reflected the esti- mated effects of the strike at General Motors along with some other small factors. Even without this downward revision, real GDP was forecast to rise more slowly in the second half of the year than in the first half, mostly because of continued soft business investment and slower increases in government spending. The medium- term projection for real GDP growth was essentially un- changed, as revisions to the staff’s assumptions about factors on which the forecast was conditioned, such as financial market variables, were small and offsetting. Real GDP was expected to decelerate modestly over the medium term, mostly because of a waning boost from fiscal policy. Output was forecast to expand at a rate a little above the staff’s estimate of its potential rate of growth in 2019 and 2020 and then to slow to a pace slightly below potential output growth in 2021 and 2022. The unemployment rate was projected to be roughly flat through 2022 and to remain below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate. The staff’s forecast for core PCE price inflation this year was revised down a little in response to recent data. Be- yond this year, the projection for core inflation was un- revised, and the forecast for total inflation was a little lower in 2020 because of a downward revision in pro- jected consumer energy prices. Both total inflation and core inflation were forecast to move up slightly next year, as the low inflation readings early this year were inflation viewed as measures were forecast to continue to run somewhat be- low 2 percent through 2022. transitory; nevertheless, both The staff continued to view the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as generally similar to the average of the past 20 years. Moreover, the staff still judged that the risks to the forecast for real GDP growth were tilted to the downside, with a corresponding skew to the up- side for the unemployment rate. Important factors in that assessment were that international trade tensions and foreign economic developments seemed more likely to move in directions that could have significant nega- tive effects on the U.S. economy than to resolve more favorably than assumed. In addition, softness in busi- ness investment and manufacturing so far this year was seen as pointing to the possibility of a more substantial slowing in economic growth than the staff projected. The risks to the inflation projection were also viewed as Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ having a downward skew, in part because of the down- side risks to the forecast for economic activity. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants agreed that the labor market had remained strong over the intermeeting period and that economic activity had risen at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate had remained low. Although household spending had risen at a strong pace, business fixed in- vestment and exports had remained weak. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 per- cent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low; survey-based measures of longer-term in- flation expectations were little changed. Participants generally viewed the economic outlook as positive. Participants judged that sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective were the most likely outcomes, and they indicated that their views on these outcomes had changed little since the September meeting. Uncertainties associated with trade tensions as well as geopolitical risks had eased somewhat, though they remained elevated. In addition, inflation pressures remained muted. The risk that a global growth slowdown would further weigh on the do- mestic economy remained prominent. In their discussion of the household sector, participants agreed that consumer spending was increasing at a strong pace. They also generally expected that, in the period ahead, household spending would likely remain on a firm footing, supported by strong labor market con- ditions, rising incomes, and favorable financial condi- tions. In addition, survey measures of consumer confi- dence remained high, and a couple of participants com- mented that business contacts in consumer-facing indus- tries reported strong demand. Many participants noted that components of household spending that are thought to be particularly sensitive to interest rates had improved, including purchases of consumer durables. In addition, residential investment had turned up. Most participants who reported on spending by households in their Districts also cited favorable conditions for con- sumer spending, although several participants reported mixed data on spending or an increase in precautionary savings in their Districts. In their discussions of the business sector, participants saw trade tensions and concerns about the global growth outlook as the main factors contributing to weak busi- ness investment and exports and the associated restraint on domestic economic growth. Moreover, participants generally expected that trade uncertainty and sluggish global growth would continue to damp investment spending and exports. A number of participants judged that tight labor market conditions were also causing firms to forego investment expenditures, or invest in au- tomation systems to reduce the need for additional hir- ing. However, business sentiment appeared to remain strong for some industries, particularly those most closely connected with consumer goods. Participants discussed developments in the manufactur- ing, energy, and agricultural sectors of the U.S. economy. Manufacturing production remained weak, and continu- ing concerns about global growth and trade uncertainty suggested that conditions were unlikely to improve ma- terially over the near term. In addition, the labor strike at General Motors had disrupted motor vehicle output, and ongoing issues at Boeing were slowing manufactur- ing in the commercial aircraft industry. A couple of par- ticipants noted that activity was particularly weak for the energy industry, in part because of low petroleum prices. In addition, a few participants noted ongoing challenges in the agricultural sector, including those associated with lower crop yields, tariffs, weak export demand, and dif- ficult financial positions for many farmers. One bright spot for the agricultural sector was that some commod- ity prices had firmed recently. Participants judged that conditions in the labor market remained strong, with the unemployment rate near his- torical lows and continued solid job gains, on average. In addition, some participants commented on the strength or improvement in labor force participation na- tionally or in their Districts. However, the pace of in- creases in employment had slowed some, on net, in re- cent months. On the one hand, the slowing could be interpreted as a natural consequence of the economy be- ing near full employment. On the other hand, slowing job gains might also be indicative of some cooling in la- bor demand, which may be consistent with an observed decline in the rate of job openings and decreases in other measures of labor market tightness. Several participants commented that the preliminary benchmark revision re- leased in August by the Bureau of Labor Statistics had indicated that payroll employment gains would likely show less momentum coming into this year once those revisions are incorporated in published data early next year. Growth of wages had also slowed this year by some measures. Consistent with strong national data on _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of October 29–30, 2019Page 11 the labor market, business contacts in many Districts in- dicated continued strong labor demand, with firms still reporting difficulties finding qualified workers, or broad- ening their recruiting to include traditionally marginal- ized groups. In their discussion of inflation developments, partici- pants noted that readings on overall and core PCE infla- tion, measured on a 12-month change basis, had contin- ued to run below the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective. While survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were generally little changed, some measures of households’ inflation expectations had moved down to historically low levels. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low, with some longer-term measures being at or near multi-year lows. Weakness in the global economy, perceptions of downside risks to growth, and subdued global inflation pressures were cited as factors tilting inflation risk to the downside, and a few participants commented that they expected inflation to run below 2 percent for some time. Some other participants, however, saw the recent infla- tion data as consistent with their previous assessment that much of the weakness seen early in the year would be transitory, or that some recent monthly readings seemed broadly consistent with the Committee's longer- run inflation objective of 2 percent. A couple of partic- ipants noted that some measures of inflation could tem- porarily move above 2 percent early next year because of the transitory effects of tariffs. Participants also discussed risks regarding the outlook for economic activity, which remained tilted to the downside. Some risks were seen to have eased a bit, al- though they remained elevated. There were some tenta- tive signs that trade tensions were easing, the probability of a no-deal Brexit was judged to have lessened, and some other geopolitical tensions had diminished. Sev- eral participants noted that statistical models designed to gauge the probability of recession, including those based on information from the yield curve, suggested that the likelihood of a recession occurring over the medium term had fallen somewhat over the intermeeting period. However, other downside risks had not diminished. In particular, some further signs of a global slowdown in economic growth emerged; weakening in the global economy could further restrain the domestic economy, and the risk that the weakness in domestic business spending, manufacturing, and exports could give rise to slower hiring and weigh on household spending re- mained prominent. Among those participants who commented on financial stability, most highlighted the risks associated with high levels of corporate indebtedness and elevated valuation pressures for a variety of risky assets. Although financial stability risks overall were seen as moderate, several par- ticipants indicated that imbalances in the corporate debt market had grown over the economic expansion and raised the concern that deteriorating credit quality could lead to sharp increases in risk spreads in corporate bond markets; these developments could amplify the effects of an adverse shock to the economy. Several partici- pants were concerned that some banks had reduced the sizes of their capital buffers at a time when they should be rising. A few participants observed that valuations in equity and bond markets were high by historical stand- ards and that CRE valuations were also elevated. A cou- ple of participants indicated that market participants may be overly optimistic in the pricing of risk for corporate debt. A couple of participants judged that the monitor- ing of financial stability vulnerabilities should also en- compass risks related to climate change. In their consideration of the monetary policy options at this meeting, most participants believed that a reduction of 25 basis points in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate. In discussing the reasons for such a decision, these participants continued to point to global developments weighing on the economic outlook, the need to provide insurance against potential downside risks to the economic outlook, and the importance of returning inflation to the Committee’s symmetric 2 per- cent objective on a sustained basis. A couple of partici- pants who were supportive of a rate cut at this meeting indicated that the decision to reduce the federal funds rate by 25 basis points was a close call relative to the op- tion of leaving the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting. Many participants judged that an additional modest eas- ing at this meeting was appropriate in light of persistent weakness in global growth and elevated uncertainty re- garding trade developments. Nonetheless, these partic- ipants noted that incoming data had continued to sug- gest that the economy had proven resilient in the face of continued headwinds from global developments and that previous adjustments to monetary policy would continue to help sustain economic growth. In addition, several participants suggested that a modest easing of policy at this meeting would likely better align the target range for the federal funds rate with a variety of indica- tors used to assess the appropriate policy stance, includ- ing estimates of the neutral interest rate and the slope of the yield curve. A couple of participants judged that Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ there was more room for the labor market to improve. Accordingly, they saw further accommodation as best supporting both of the Committee’s dual-mandate ob- jectives. Many participants continued to view the downside risks surrounding the economic outlook as elevated, further underscoring the case for a rate cut at this meeting. In particular, risks to the outlook associated with global economic growth and international trade were still seen as significant despite some encouraging geopolitical and trade-related developments over the intermeeting pe- riod. In light of these risks, a number of participants were concerned that weakness in business spending, manufacturing, and exports could spill over to labor markets and consumer spending and threaten the eco- nomic expansion. A few participants observed that the considerations favoring easing at this meeting were rein- forced by the proximity of the federal funds rate to the ELB. In their view, providing adequate accommodation while still away from the ELB would best mitigate the possibility of a costly return to the ELB. Many participants also cited the level of inflation or in- flation expectations as justifying a reduction of 25 basis points in the federal funds rate at this meeting. Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective, and inflationary pressures remained muted. Several participants raised concerns that measures of inflation expectations remained low and could decline further without a more accommodative policy stance. A couple of these participants, pointing to experiences in Japan and the euro area, were con- cerned that persistent inflation shortfalls could lead to a decline in longer-run inflation expectations and less room to reduce the federal funds rate in the event of a future recession. In general, the participants who justi- fied further easing at this meeting based on considera- tions related to inflation viewed this action as helping to move inflation up to the Committee’s 2 percent objec- tive on a sustained basis and to anchor inflation expec- tations at levels consistent with that objective. Some participants favored maintaining the existing tar- get range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. These participants suggested that the baseline projection for the economy remained favorable, with inflation ex- pected to move up and stay near the Committee’s 2 per- cent objective. They also judged that policy accommo- dation was already adequate and, in light of lags in the transmission of monetary policy, preferred to take some time to assess the economic effects of the Committee’s previous policy actions before easing policy further. Several participants noted that downside risks had di- minished over the intermeeting period and saw little in- dication that weakness in business sentiment was spilling over into labor markets and consumer spending. A few participants raised the concern that a further easing of monetary policy at this meeting could encourage exces- sive risk-taking and exacerbate imbalances in the finan- cial sector. With regard to monetary policy beyond this meeting, most participants judged that the stance of policy, after a 25 basis point reduction at this meeting, would be well calibrated to support the outlook of moderate growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective and likely would remain so as long as incoming information about the economy did not result in a material reassessment of the economic outlook. However, participants noted that policy was not on a preset course and that they would be monitor- ing the effects of the Committee’s recent policy actions, as well as other information bearing on the economic outlook, in assessing the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. A couple of participants expressed the view that the Committee should reinforce its postmeeting statement with additional communica- tions indicating that another reduction in the federal funds rate was unlikely in the near term unless incoming information was consistent with a significant slowdown in the pace of economic activity. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members noted that information received since the Sep- tember meeting indicated that the labor market re- mained strong and that economic activity had been ris- ing at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on av- erage, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Household spending had been rising at a strong pace. However, business fixed investment and exports remained weak, as softness in global growth and international trade developments continued to weigh on those sectors. On a 12-month basis, both the overall inflation rate and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low. Sur- vey-based measures of longer-term inflation expecta- tions were little changed. In light of the implications of global developments for the economic outlook as well as muted inflation pres- sures, most members agreed to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1½ to 1¾ percent at this meeting. The members who supported this action _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of October 29–30, 2019Page 13 viewed it as consistent with helping offset the effects on aggregate demand of weak global growth and trade de- velopments, insuring against downside risks arising from those sources, and promoting a more rapid return of in- flation to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec- tive. Two members preferred to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. These members indicated that the economic outlook re- mained positive and that they anticipated, under an un- changed policy stance, continued strong labor market conditions and solid growth in activity, with inflation gradually moving up to the Committee’s 2 percent ob- jective. Members agreed that, in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and ex- pected economic conditions relative to its maximum- employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent infla- tion objective. They also agreed that those assessments would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed to update the language of the Committee’s de- scription of incoming data to acknowledge that invest- ment spending and U.S. exports had remained weak. In describing the monetary policy outlook, they also agreed to remove the “act as appropriate” language and empha- size that the Committee would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook as it assessed the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. This change was seen as consistent with the view that the current stance of monetary policy was likely to remain appropriate as long as the economy performed broadly in line with the Com- mittee’s expectations and that policy was not on a preset course and could change if developments emerged that led to a material reassessment of the economic outlook. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective October 31, 2019, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1½ to 1¾ percent. In light of recent and ex- pected increases in the Federal Reserve’s non- reserve liabilities, the Committee directs the Desk to purchase Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of next year to maintain over time ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September 2019. The Committee also directs the Desk to con- duct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations at least through January of next year to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of sharp increases in non-reserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely af- fect policy implementation. In addition, the Committee directs the Desk to conduct over- night reverse repurchase operations (and re- verse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accom- modate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 1.45 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such op- erations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and to continue reinvesting all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities received during each calendar month. Principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in Treasury securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities outstanding; principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in agency mortgage-backed securities. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Although household spending has been rising at a strong pace, business fixed investment and exports remain weak. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are run- ning below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey- based measures of longer-term inflation expec- tations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. In light of the implications of global developments for the economic out- look as well as muted inflation pressures, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1½ to 1¾ percent. This action supports the Committee’s view that sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective are the most likely outcomes, but uncer- tainties about this outlook remain. The Com- mittee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic out- look as it assesses the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Richard H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: Esther L. George and Eric Rosengren. President George dissented at this meeting because she believed that an unchanged setting of monetary policy was appropriate based on incoming data and the outlook for economic activity over the medium term. Recogniz- ing risks to the outlook from the effects of trade devel- opments and weaker global activity, President George would be prepared to adjust policy should incoming data point to a materially weaker outlook for the economy. President Rosengren dissented because he judged that monetary policy was already accommodative and that additional accommodation was not needed for an econ- omy in which labor markets are very tight. He judged that providing additional accommodation posed risks of further inflating the prices of risky assets and encourag- ing households and firms to take on too much leverage. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1½ to 1¾ per- cent, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to lower the interest rate paid on required and excess re- serve balances to 1.55 percent and voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to 2.25 percent, effective October 31, 2019. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, December 10– 11, 2019. The meeting adjourned at 9:50 a.m. on Octo- ber 30, 2019. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on October 8, 2019, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 17–18, 2019. Videoconference meeting of October 4, 2019 The Committee met by videoconference on October 4, 2019, to review developments in money markets and to discuss steps the Committee could take to facilitate effi- cient and effective implementation of monetary policy. The staff reviewed recent developments in money mar- kets and the effect of the Desk’s continued offering of overnight and term repo operations. Staff analysis and market commentary suggested that many factors con- tributed to the funding stresses that emerged in mid-Sep- tember. In particular, financial institutions’ internal risk limits and balance sheet costs may have slowed the dis- tribution of liquidity across the system at a time when reserves had dropped sharply and Treasury issuance was elevated. Although money market conditions had since improved, market participants expressed uncertainty about how funding market conditions may evolve over coming months, especially around year-end. Further _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of October 29–30, 2019Page 15 out, the April 2020 tax season, with associated reduc- tions in reserves around that time, was viewed as another point at which money market pressures could emerge. of monetary policy implementation not intended to af- fect the stance of monetary policy and should be com- municated as such. The manager pro tem reviewed options that the Com- mittee could consider to boost the level of reserves in the banking system and to address temporary money market pressures that could adversely affect monetary policy implementation. These options included a pro- gram of Treasury bill purchases coupled with overnight and term repo operations to maintain reserves at or above their early September level. During their discussion, all FOMC participants agreed that control over the federal funds rate was a priority and that recent money market developments suggested it was appropriate to consider steps at this time to maintain a level of reserves consistent with the Committee’s cho- sen ample-reserves regime. Given the projected decline in reserves around year-end and in the spring of 2020, they judged that it was important to reach consensus soon on a near-term plan and associated communica- tions. All participants expressed support for a plan to purchase Treasury bills into the second quarter of 2020 and to continue conducting overnight and term repo opera- tions at least through January of next year. Many partic- ipants supported conducting operations to maintain re- serve balances around the level that prevailed in early September. Some others suggested moving to an even higher level of reserves to provide an extra buffer and greater assurance of control over the federal funds rate. In discussing the pace of Treasury bill purchases, many participants supported a relatively rapid pace to boost reserve levels quickly, while others supported a more moderate pace of purchases. Participants generally judged that Treasury bill purchases and the associated increase in reserves would, over time, result in a gradual reduction in the need for repo operations. A few partic- ipants indicated that purchasing Treasury notes and bonds with limited remaining maturities could also be considered as a way to boost reserves, particularly if the Federal Reserve faced constraints on the pace at which it could purchase Treasury bills. Participants generally acknowledged some uncertainty over the efficient and effective level of reserves and noted it would be prudent to continue to monitor money market developments and stand ready to adjust the plan as necessary. Overall, par- ticipants agreed that the pace of purchases as well as the parameters of the repo operations were technical details Most participants preferred not to wait until the Octo- ber 29–30 FOMC meeting to issue a public statement regarding the planned Treasury bill purchases and repo operations. They noted that releasing a statement before the October 29–30 FOMC meeting would help rein- force the point that these actions were technical and not intended to affect the stance of policy. In addition, a few participants remarked that an earlier release would allow the Desk to begin boosting the level of reserves sooner. A couple of participants, however, wanted to wait until the October 29–30 FOMC meeting to announce the plan so as not to surprise market participants or lead them to infer that the Committee regarded the situation as dire and thus requiring immediate action. The Chair proposed having the staff produce a draft statement that the Committee could comment on early in the following week. Formal approval could occur by notation vote with an anticipated release of a statement to the public on October 11, 2019. Participants discussed longer-term issues that the Com- mittee might want to study once the near-term plan was in place. In particular, many participants mentioned that the Committee may want to continue its previous dis- cussion of a standing repo facility as a part of the long- run implementation framework. Almost all of these par- ticipants noted that such a facility was an option to pro- vide a backstop to buffer shocks that could adversely af- fect policy implementation, and several of these partici- pants mentioned the potential for the facility to support banks’ liquidity risk management while reducing the de- mand for reserves. Other participants, instead, high- lighted that policy implementation had worked well with larger quantities of reserves and focused their discussion on actions to firmly establish an ample supply of reserves over the longer run. A number of participants noted that a discussion of a broader range of factors that affect the level and volatility of reserves may be appropriate at a future meeting. On October 11, 2019, the Committee approved by no- tation vote the following statement that outlines steps to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample so that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve’s administered rates, and in which active management of the supply of re- serves is not required. Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ STATEMENT REGARDING MONETARY POL- ICY IMPLEMENTATION (Adopted October 11, 2019) Consistent with its January 2019 Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, the Committee reaffirms its intention to implement monetary policy in a regime in which an am- ple supply of reserves ensures that control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve’s administered rates, and in which active management of the supply of reserves is not required. To ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample, the Committee approved by notation vote completed on October 11, 2019, the following steps: • In light of recent and expected increases in the Fed- eral Reserve’s non-reserve liabilities, the Federal Re- serve will purchase Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of next year in order to maintain over time ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September 2019. • In addition, the Federal Reserve will conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations at least through January of next year to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during peri- ods of sharp increases in non-reserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation. These actions are purely technical measures to support the effective implementation of the FOMC’s monetary policy, and do not represent a change in the stance of monetary policy. The Committee will continue to mon- itor money market developments as it assesses the level of reserves most consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation. The Committee stands ready to adjust the details of these plans as necessary to foster ef- ficient and effective implementation of monetary policy. In connection with these plans, the Federal Open Market Committee voted unanimously to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until in- structed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: “Effective October 15, 2019, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1-3/4 to 2 percent. In light of recent and ex- pected increases in the Federal Reserve’s non- reserve liabilities, the Committee directs the Desk to purchase Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of next year to maintain over time ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September 2019. The Committee also directs the Desk to con- duct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations at least through January of next year to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of sharp increases in non-reserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely af- fect policy implementation. In addition, the Committee directs the Desk to conduct over- night reverse repurchase operations (and re- verse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accom- modate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 1.70 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such op- erations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and to continue reinvesting all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities received during each calendar month. Principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in Treasury securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities outstanding; principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in agency mortgage-backed securities. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of October 29–30, 2019Page 17 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee December 10–11, 2019 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 10, 2019, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, December 11, 2019, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Richard H. Clarida Charles L. Evans Esther L. George Randal K. Quarles Eric Rosengren Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account2 Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Eric Belsky,3 Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors; Matthew J. Eichner,4 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Trevor A. Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, of Board Members, Board of Governors Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Steven B. Kamin, Economist Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian M. Doyle, Wendy E. Dunn, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade, and Ivan Vidangos, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Diana Hancock, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, Christopher J. Antulio N. Bomfim and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Waller, William Wascher, Jonathan L. Willis, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Economists Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 The Committee appointed Lorie K. Logan to serve as the manager of the System Open Market Account at the conclu- sion of the meeting. 3 Attended through the discussion of the review of the mone- tary policy framework. 4 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Eric C. Engstrom, Senior Adviser, Division of Becky C. Bareford, First Vice President, Federal Research and Statistics, and Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Elizabeth K. Kiser, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Elizabeth Klee, Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; David López-Salido, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Reserve Bank of Richmond David Altig, Michael Dotsey, Jeffrey Fuhrer,3 and Sylvain Leduc, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Philadelphia, Boston, and San Francisco, respectively Todd E. Clark, Marc Giannoni,3 and Spencer Krane, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively Glenn Follette, Patrick E. McCabe,5 and John M. Jonathan P. McCarthy, Alexander L. Wolman, and Roberts, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Matteo Iacoviello and Andrea Raffo,6 Deputy Associate Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,3 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Etienne Gagnon, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Paul Lengermann, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors; Seung J. Lee,7 Section Chief, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo and Kurt F. Lewis, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Laura J. Feiveson,3 Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Nils Goernemann,3 Senior Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Donielle A. Winford, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 5 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 6 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations, and from the dis- cussion of current monetary policy through the end of the meeting. Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Richmond, and New York, respectively Thomas D. Tallarini, Jr., Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Karel Mertens,3 Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Daniel Cooper, Senior Economist and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Scott Davis, Senior Research Economist and Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Julie Hotchkiss,3 Research Economist and Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices Participants continued to discuss issues related to the ongoing review of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. The staff summarized the feedback received through the Fed Lis- tens initiative, a series of 14 public-facing events con- ducted around the country with a broad range of indi- viduals and groups. These events engaged with the pub- lic directly on issues pertaining to the dual-mandate ob- jectives of maximum employment and stable prices. Representatives from underserved communities who participated in the Fed Listens events generally saw the current strong labor market as providing significant ben- efits to their communities, most notably by creating 7 Attended the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ greater opportunities for individuals who have experi- enced difficulty finding jobs in the past. Nevertheless, these representatives noted that the benefits from cur- rent labor market conditions flowing to people in their communities were less than those implied by national statistics, and they expressed concerns that the recent gains might not be sustained in the event of an economic downturn. Business representatives reported experienc- ing challenges finding qualified workers and described several initiatives to attract and retain workers, including training programs and a willingness to employ individu- als who are unlikely to have been considered in less fa- vorable labor market conditions. Inflation develop- ments elicited fewer comments at these events and were generally seen as posing less of a challenge than labor market conditions. Representatives of retirees men- tioned difficulties associated with the rising costs of health care and prescription drugs, whereas those repre- senting low- and middle-income communities pointed to the rising costs of basic necessities such as housing, utilities, and food. Business representatives emphasized the importance of low and stable inflation for planning and decisionmaking. Event participants were concerned about rising costs of living and generally perceived low inflation as desirable from that perspective. Event par- ticipants were asked about monetary policymakers’ con- cerns regarding overall inflation running persistently be- low 2 percent; they noted that the Federal Reserve could better communicate its reasons for these concerns. When asked about the effects of changes in interest rates, representatives of underserved communities said that such changes had little effect on many members of their communities who have limited or no access to credit. Representatives of retirees conveyed a more neg- ative view of low interest rates, given the greater reliance of wealthier retirees on interest income. Business repre- sentatives generally found the low interest rate environ- ment beneficial. The staff briefing also included an analysis of distribu- tional considerations for monetary policy. Consistent with the feedback received at the Fed Listens events, the evidence reviewed by the staff showed that workers who are young, less educated, African American, or Hispanic tend to face a greater-than-average risk of losing their jobs during recessions. The staff used simulations from a specific macroeconomic model to explore how heter- ogeneity of households might affect the transmission of economic shocks and changes in monetary policy to the economy. The staff’s simulations embedded the as- sumption that households have limited ability to borrow, which makes some households’ consumption spending more sensitive to changes in income. As a result, in these simulations, downturns lead to larger contractions in aggregate demand than would be the case if all house- holds could borrow to support their consumption spending in response to a loss in income. The amplifi- cation of recessionary shocks was especially large when the monetary policy response was constrained by the ef- fective lower bound (ELB) on the policy interest rate. Overall, the analysis suggested that the costs of reces- sions, as well as the benefits of economic stabilization, might be larger than suggested by models that did not account for differences across households regarding their access to credit. Participants agreed that the Fed Listens outreach efforts had informed their understanding of the goals and tradeoffs associated with monetary policy and had pro- vided highly useful input into their deliberations. Several participants voiced their desire to continue the conver- sations initiated at the Fed Listens events. Participants also shared their appreciation of the feedback they re- ceive on a regular basis from members of the public, in- cluding through the Federal Reserve System’s extensive networks of contacts and community outreach efforts. A few participants emphasized that policymakers’ en- gagement with the public helps build trust, fosters trans- parency, and reinforces the credibility of the Federal Re- serve. Participants generally saw the feedback from Fed Listens events as reinforcing the importance of sustaining the economic expansion so that the effects of a persistently strong job market reach more of those who, in the past, had experienced difficulty finding employment. Several participants mentioned that sustaining strong labor mar- ket conditions helps workers build skills and cement their attachment to the labor force in a manner that might reduce the scarring effects of future downturns and might increase the maximum sustainable level of employment over the longer run. A number of partici- pants also emphasized that sustaining strong labor mar- ket conditions is helpful for meeting the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent inflation goal. Some participants spoke to some of the challenges asso- ciated with assessing the maximum level of employment. A few participants noted that aggregate statistics mask significant heterogeneity in labor market outcomes. A few others pointed to the continued absence of signifi- cant wage and price pressure—traditionally seen as a symptom of a tight labor market—even as the unem- ployment rate had moved below most estimates of its longer-run level. A few participants raised the possibility that the maximum sustainable level of employment had Minutes of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ increased as the expansion continued to draw workers who would otherwise not be in the labor force. Regarding inflation, participants recognized that seg- ments of the public generally do not regard the fact that aggregate inflation is running modestly below the Com- mittee’s 2 percent goal as a problem. A few participants noted that the public’s view on this issue was under- standable from the perspective of households and busi- nesses going about their daily lives in an economy with low and stable inflation. That said, a couple of partici- pants cautioned that inflation could emerge as a concern among members of the public if it became more volatile or ran at levels substantially away from the Committee’s goal. Many participants also warned about the macro- economic consequences of not achieving 2 percent on a sustained basis. In particular, if inflation ran persistently below the Committee’s objective, longer-term inflation expectations could drift down, resulting in lower actual inflation. With lower inflation, nominal interest rates would be lower as well and therefore closer to the ELB. As a result, the scope for monetary policy to support the economy in a future downturn through interest rate cuts would be reduced, a situation that would likely worsen economic outcomes for households and businesses. In light of these considerations, participants generally agreed that they need to communicate more clearly to the public their rationale for, and commitment to, achieving 2 percent inflation on a sustained basis and of ensuring that longer-run inflation expectations are an- chored at levels consistent with this objective. To ensure the effectiveness of these and other communications, several participants stressed that the Federal Reserve needs to adapt its communications to various audiences. A few participants emphasized that communications about the Committee’s resolve to return inflation to 2 percent need to be backed with actions and results to ensure that the public sees these communications as credible. With respect to the role of distributional considerations in the pursuit of the dual-mandate objectives, several participants noted that it was important for policymakers to be cognizant of how monetary policy affects different segments of the population. Most participants com- mented on the large costs that recessions and high un- employment impose on communities, notably on their most vulnerable constituents, and stressed the need for monetary policy to seek to avoid recessions in the first place or reduce their severity when they occur. A num- ber of these participants emphasized that, while mone- tary policy actions can have different effects across groups, monetary policy actions that are driven by the pursuit of maximum employment and stable prices ulti- mately benefit all groups. Participants viewed the role of monetary policy as supporting a strong, stable econ- omy that benefits all Americans. Various participants noted that monetary policy is a blunt instrument whose effects cannot be targeted to specific communities. Sev- eral participants remarked that while monetary policy ac- tions can improve the conditions of vulnerable commu- nities, notably by supporting a strong job market, these actions may not reduce inequality in wealth and income. For these and other reasons, many participants empha- sized that policies other than monetary policy are appro- priate to directly address inequality. In addition, a couple of participants cautioned that maintaining accommoda- tive financial conditions could be counterproductive if doing so fueled financial imbalances and exacerbated the next economic downturn. Participants agreed that their review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices would con- tinue at future meetings and, as a result, that the Com- mittee would not reaffirm its existing Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy at the January 2020 meeting. The Committee plans to revisit this statement closer to the conclusion of the review, likely around the middle of 2020. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The System Open Market Account manager first re- viewed developments in financial markets over the inter- meeting period. Market prices appeared to respond mainly to signs of stabilization in the U.S. and global economies and to developments associated with trade policy. Market participants noted some risks to the out- look including Brexit and geopolitical factors. Regarding expectations for U.S. monetary policy, the Open Market Trading Desk’s surveys and market-based indicators pointed to a very high perceived likelihood of no change in the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. The expected path of the federal funds rate implied by the medians of survey respondents’ modal forecasts remained essentially flat through 2020. Survey- and market-implied uncertainty about the near- term outlook for monetary policy declined, with market commentary attributing the decrease in part to the Com- mittee’s October communications. Survey respondents placed a higher probability on a reduction in the target range over 2020 than an increase. The manager turned next to a review of money market developments since the October meeting, starting with an update on the implementation of the Committee’s Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ strategy to ensure ample reserves. Reserve management purchases of Treasury bills continued at a pace of $60 billion per month, with propositions remaining strong and little discernible effect on market function- ing. While these purchases accumulated, the Desk con- tinued to conduct regular repurchase agreement (repo) operations in order to maintain reserves at or above the level that prevailed in early September. Repos outstand- ing from these Desk operations totaled roughly $215 bil- lion per day, consisting of both overnight and term op- erations. As reserve levels increased, the distribution of reserves across bank types became comparable with where it was in early September. The federal funds rate and other overnight money market rates fell modestly and were close to the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate for most of the period. The intraday dispersion of rates was also lower than when reserves were at similar levels be- fore September. In addition to helping keep reserves ample, repo operations likely have reduced pressures in money markets and the dispersion in money market rates. With respect to conditions around year-end, the man- ager noted that forward measures of market pricing con- tinued to indicate expectations of temporary upward pressures on some secured rates. Money market rates are often volatile around year-end, and Federal Reserve operations are not intended to eliminate all year-end pressures but rather to ensure that reserve supply re- mains ample and to mitigate the risk that such pressures could adversely affect the implementation of monetary policy. The Desk had already conducted three longer- term repo operations spanning year-end—for a total of $75 billion—and planned to announce an additional longer-term operation, as well as increase the amount of overnight repo offered around the year-end date. The manager reported that the Desk is closely monitoring re- serves and money market conditions and that it is pre- pared to adjust plans as needed. The manager discussed two operational considerations around policy implementation. The first involved the risk that future Treasury bill purchases could have a larger effect on liquidity in the Treasury bill market in light of expected seasonal declines in bill issuance and the Federal Reserve’s growing ownership share of out- standing bills. If this risk were to materialize, the Federal Reserve could consider expanding the universe of secu- rities purchased for reserve management purposes to in- clude coupon-bearing Treasury securities with a short time to maturity. Purchases of these short-dated securi- ties would not affect broader financial conditions or the stance of monetary policy. The manager also discussed expectations to gradually transition away from active repo operations next year as Treasury bill purchases sup- ply a larger base of reserves. The calendar of repo oper- ations starting in mid-January could reflect a gradual re- duction in active repo operations. The manager indi- cated that some repos might be needed at least through April, when tax payments will sharply reduce reserve lev- els. As reserves remain ample, the manager noted that it may become appropriate at some point to implement a tech- nical adjustment to the IOER rate and the offered rate on overnight reverse repurchase (ON RRP) agreements. Should conditions warrant this adjustment, the IOER rate could move closer to the middle of the target range for the federal funds rate, and the ON RRP rate could be realigned with the bottom of the target range. The manager also noted that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York communicated to its customers that the remuneration rate on the foreign repo pool will be re- vised to be generally equivalent to the overnight reverse repo rate. This action may reduce activity in the pool to some extent and increase the level of reserves. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available for the December 10–11 meeting indicated that labor market conditions remained strong and that real gross domestic product (GDP) was increasing at a moderate rate in the second half of 2019. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal con- sumption expenditures (PCE), remained below 2 per- cent in October. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed. Total nonfarm payroll employment surged in Novem- ber, boosted in part by the return of auto workers who had previously been on strike in October. The average pace of job gains over the three months ending in No- vember, which is unaffected by the strike, was stronger than earlier in 2019. However, the rate of increase in payrolls so far this year was slower than last year, even accounting for the anticipated effects of the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ benchmark revision to payroll employ- ment, which will be incorporated in the published data in February 2020. The unemployment rate ticked up in October but then moved back down to its 50-year low Minutes of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ of 3.5 percent in November; the labor force participa- tion rate and the employment-to-population ratio held steady, on balance, over those two months. The unem- ployment rates for African Americans, Asians, Hispan- ics, and whites were little changed, on net, over the past two months; the unemployment rate for each group was below its level at the end of the previous economic ex- pansion, though persistent differentials between these rates remained. The average share of workers employed part time for economic reasons in November stayed be- low its level in late 2007. Both the rate of private-sector job openings and the rate of quits edged down in Sep- tember, but these readings were still at fairly elevated lev- els. The four-week moving average of initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits through late Novem- ber remained near historically low levels. In general, re- cent measures of nominal wage growth continued to be moderate. Total labor compensation per hour in the business sector increased 3.7 percent over the four quar- ters ending in the third quarter. The employment cost index for private-sector workers rose 2.7 percent over the 12 months ending in September, while average hourly earnings for all employees increased 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending in November. Total consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.3 percent over the 12 months ending in October. Core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) was 1.6 percent over that same 12-month period, while con- sumer food price inflation was lower than core inflation and consumer energy prices declined. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation con- structed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas remained at 2 percent in October. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2.1 percent over the 12 months ending in No- vember, while core CPI inflation was 2.3 percent. Re- cent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations—including those from the Uni- versity of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, the Survey of Consumer Expectations from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Sur- vey of Market Participants—were little changed, on bal- ance; the Michigan survey measure ticked back down in early December to the bottom of its recent range after ticking up in November. Real PCE continued to expand in October following a strong gain in the third quarter. Sales of light motor ve- hicles rose markedly in November. Key factors that in- fluence consumer spending—including the low unem- ployment rate, the upward trend in real disposable in- come, high levels of households’ net worth, and gener- ally low interest rates—were supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. The Michigan survey measure of consumer sentiment rose again in early De- cember to an upbeat level and had more than recovered from its drop in August; the Conference Board survey measure of consumer confidence remained at a favora- ble level in November. Real residential investment appeared to be increasing further after rising solidly in the third quarter. Both starts and building permit issuance for single-family homes increased in October, and starts of multifamily units also rose. Existing home sales continued to in- crease in October, although new home sales edged down following a solid gain in the third quarter. All told, the data on construction and sales continued to suggest that the decline in mortgage rates since late 2018 has been boosting housing activity. Real nonresidential private fixed investment remained weak overall after declining in the second and third quar- ters. Nominal shipments and new orders of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased solidly in Oc- tober following a string of decreases, although many for- ward-looking indicators pointed to continued softness in business equipment spending. Most measures of busi- ness sentiment were still downbeat, analysts’ expecta- tions of firms’ longer-term profit growth edged down further, and concerns about trade developments contin- ued to weigh on firms’ investment decisions. Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential structures out- side of the drilling and mining sector continued to de- cline in October, and the total number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sec- tor—fell further through early December. Industrial production decreased in October and re- mained notably lower than at the beginning of the year. Production in October continued to be held down by the strike at General Motors, although the end of the strike and automakers’ schedules suggested that assem- blies of light motor vehicles would rebound in Novem- ber. Overall manufacturing production appeared likely to remain soft in coming months, reflecting generally weak readings on new orders from national and regional manufacturing surveys, declining domestic business in- vestment, slow economic growth abroad, and a persis- tent drag from trade developments. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Total real government purchases were increasing slowly in the fourth quarter. Nominal defense spending in Oc- tober pointed to only a modest rise in real federal gov- ernment purchases. Real purchases by state and local governments looked to be moving roughly sideways; state and local payrolls expanded modestly, on net, over October and November, and nominal construction spending by these governments was about flat in Octo- ber. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in October. Exports fell a little, with declines in all export categories except for services and industrial supplies. Imports fell much more, and the declines were broad based, with the largest contributions coming from im- ports of consumer goods and automotive products. Available trade data suggested that the contribution of net exports to real GDP growth, which was slightly neg- ative in the third quarter, would turn somewhat positive in the fourth quarter. Foreign economic growth slowed further in the third quarter amid continued weakness in the global manufac- turing sector. Recent monthly indicators pointed to a stabilization in the pace of economic growth in China and several advanced foreign economies. However, other indicators suggested that social unrest weighed heavily on economic activity in several countries, most notably in Hong Kong, and that weakness persisted in parts of Latin America. Foreign inflation picked up somewhat as energy prices stabilized, although inflation remained relatively low in most foreign economies. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investor sentiment fluctuated over the intermeeting pe- riod largely in response to ongoing trade negotiations be- tween the United States and China. On net, equity prices increased moderately while corporate bond spreads nar- rowed slightly. Yields on nominal Treasury securities were little changed. Financing conditions for businesses and households remained supportive of spending and economic activity. Federal Reserve communications over the intermeeting period were viewed as suggesting that additional near- term changes to the target range for the federal funds rate were less likely than had previously been expected. A straight read of the probability distribution for the fed- eral funds rate implied by options prices suggested that investors assigned a high probability to the target range remaining unchanged at the December FOMC meeting. Forward rates implied by overnight index swap quotes declined slightly, on net, and implied about a 25 basis point decline in the federal funds rate by the end of 2020. Nominal Treasury yields fluctuated over the intermeet- ing period but, on net, the Treasury curve was little changed. Measures of inflation compensation over the next 5 years and 5 to 10 years ahead based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities increased slightly from near multiyear low levels. Broad stock price indexes increased moderately over the intermeeting period amid movements largely attributed trade-related developments and stronger-than- to expected U.S. employment reports. Option-implied vol- atility on the S&P 500 index increased modestly but re- mained near the low end of its historical distribution. On net, corporate credit spreads narrowed slightly. Conditions in short-term funding markets were stable over the intermeeting period. Interest rates for over- night secured and unsecured loans fell in line with the 25 basis point decrease in the target range for the federal funds rate at the October FOMC meeting. Trading in money markets was orderly, with volumes in normal ranges and spreads narrower relative to the IOER rate. Pressures on rates at October month-end and Novem- ber mid-month—both days with sizable settlements of Treasury auctions—were muted compared with other recent Treasury issuance days. The Desk’s open market operations aimed at maintaining ample reserves pro- ceeded smoothly. As in U.S. markets, sentiment in foreign financial mar- kets fluctuated in response to news on U.S.–China trade negotiations. Most foreign equity price indexes and long-term sovereign yields in Germany, the United Kingdom, and Japan increased modestly on net. The broad dollar index ended the period little changed. Po- litical unrest in Hong Kong and Latin America garnered some financial market attention and led to a weakening of some Latin American currencies, notably the Chilean peso, but the imprint on broader financial markets was limited. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses re- mained accommodative. Gross issuance of corporate bonds was robust, on average, in October and Novem- ber. Gross issuance of institutional leveraged loans re- mained near recent monthly averages. Meanwhile, com- mercial and industrial loans held by banks contracted in October but increased modestly in November. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations deteriorated slightly in recent months but remained solid overall. Af- ter particularly strong gross equity issuance in Septem- ber, initial public offerings declined and seasoned offer- ings remained solid in October and November. Credit Minutes of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ conditions for both small businesses and municipalities stayed accommodative. 2022 and to remain below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions also remained generally accommodative. (CMBS) Commercial mortgage-backed spreads widened slightly over the intermeeting period but remained near the low end of their post-crisis range. Agency and non-agency CMBS issuance increased in October to a post-crisis high. CRE loan growth at banks also increased in October relative to recent quarters. securities Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative over the intermeeting period. Mortgage rates were little changed since the October FOMC meeting. Consistent with this year’s decline in mortgage rates, home-purchase originations and refi- nancing originations both rose. Mortgage credit stand- ards were little changed. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re- mained generally supportive of growth in consumer spending, although conditions continued to be tight for nonprime borrowers. Auto loans increased, consistent with significant declines in auto loan interest rates this year. Credit card debt grew at a solid pace, and interest rates on credit card debt began to fall. Consumer asset-backed securities issuance was strong through Oc- tober as spreads stabilized at levels that were somewhat above their post-crisis averages. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. real GDP growth prepared by the staff for the December FOMC meeting was revised up a little for the second half of 2019 relative to the pre- vious projection. This revision primarily reflected in- coming data for household spending and business in- vestment that were somewhat stronger than expected. Even with this upward revision, real GDP was forecast to rise more slowly in the second half of the year than in the first half, mostly because of continued soft business investment and slower increases in government spend- ing. The forecast for real GDP growth over the medium term was also revised up a bit, on balance, primarily in response to a somewhat higher projected path for equity prices. Nevertheless, real GDP growth was still ex- pected to slow modestly in the coming years, largely be- cause of a fading boost from fiscal policy. Output was forecast to expand at a rate a little above the staff’s esti- mate of its potential rate of growth in 2019 through 2021 and then to slow to a pace slightly below potential output growth in 2022. The unemployment rate was projected to be roughly flat at around its current level through The staff’s forecast for total PCE price inflation in 2019 was revised down a bit, as a downward revision to core PCE prices in response to recent data was partly offset by an upward revision to consumer energy prices. Be- yond 2019, core inflation was expected to be above its pace this year, and this projection was revised up a touch because of the slightly tighter resource utilization in the current forecast. The projection for total inflation in 2020 was a little lower than for core inflation due to a projected decline in consumer energy prices. Over the remainder of the medium-term projection, total inflation was expected to be about the same as core inflation, al- though both inflation measures were forecast to con- tinue to run a bit below 2 percent through 2022. The staff continued to view the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as generally similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff viewed the downside risks to economic activity as having eased a bit since the pre- vious forecast but still judged that the risks to the fore- cast for real GDP growth were tilted to the downside, with a corresponding skew to the upside for the unem- ployment rate. Important factors influencing this assess- ment were that international trade tensions and foreign economic developments seemed more likely to move in directions that could have significant negative effects on the U.S. economy than to resolve more favorably than assumed. In addition, softness in business investment and manufacturing production so far this year were seen as pointing to the possibility of a more substantial slow- ing in economic growth than the staff projected. The risks to the inflation projection were also viewed as hav- ing a downward skew, in part because of the downside risks to the forecast for economic activity. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2019 through 2022 and over the longer run, based on their individual assess- ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each partici- pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- priate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. These projections are described Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which is an addendum to these minutes. Participants agreed that the labor market had remained strong over the intermeeting period and that economic activity had risen at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate had remained low. Although household spending had risen at a strong pace, business fixed in- vestment and exports had remained weak. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 per- cent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low; survey-based measures of longer-term in- flation expectations were little changed. Participants generally expected sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- jective as the most likely outcomes. This outlook re- flected, at least in part, the support provided by the cur- rent stance of monetary policy. Nevertheless, global de- velopments, related to both persistent uncertainty re- garding international trade and weakness in economic growth abroad, continued to pose some risks to the out- look, and inflation pressures remained muted. In their discussion of the household sector, participants agreed that spending had increased at a strong pace. They generally expected that consumption spending would likely remain on a firm footing, supported by strong labor market conditions, rising incomes, and solid consumer confidence. In addition, residential invest- ment had continued to pick up, reflecting, in part, the effects of lower mortgage rates. Many participants com- mented that business contacts in consumer-related in- dustries reported strong demand or that contacts were optimistic about the holiday retail spending season. However, some participants observed that recent data on retail sales or motor vehicle spending had decelerated slightly. With respect to the business sector, participants saw trade developments and concerns about the global eco- nomic growth outlook as the main factors contributing to weak business investment and exports. Participants generally expected these factors to continue to damp business investment and exports. They expressed simi- lar concerns about activity in manufacturing industries. A few participants noted that the current weakness in capital expenditures could lead to a slower pace of productivity growth in future years. A few others ob- served that businesses were diversifying their supply chains or investing in technology to adapt to persistent uncertainty regarding international trade, which might mitigate the effects of such uncertainty on future busi- ness spending. A number of participants commented on challenges fac- ing the energy and agriculture sectors. A few partici- pants remarked that activity in the energy sector was es- pecially weak, reflecting low petroleum prices, low prof- itability, and tight financing conditions for energy- producing firms. Several participants noted that the ag- ricultural sector also faced a number of difficulties, in- cluding those associated with trade developments, weak export demand, and challenging financial positions for many farmers. A couple of participants noted that farm subsidies from the federal government were offsetting a portion of the financial strain on farmers. Participants judged that conditions in the labor market remained strong, with the unemployment rate at a 50-year low, job gains remaining solid, and some measures of labor force participation increasing further. The unemployment rate was likely to remain low going forward, and various participants remarked that there were some indications that further strengthening in overall labor market conditions was possible without creating undesirable pressures on resources. In particu- lar, a number of participants noted that the labor force participation rate could rise further still. Moreover, measures of wage growth had generally remained mod- erate. However, a few participants commented that in- creases in the labor force would likely moderate as slack in the labor market diminished. In addition, a couple of participants remarked that the preliminary benchmark revision released in August by the Bureau of Labor Sta- tistics had indicated that payroll employment gains would likely show less momentum coming into this year once those revisions are incorporated in published data early next year. A couple of other participants thought it was important to better understand the quality of jobs being created. Business contacts in many Districts indi- cated continued strong labor demand, with firms report- ing difficulties in finding qualified workers or broaden- ing their recruiting to include traditionally marginalized groups. A number of participants noted that wage pres- sures were evident for some industries in their Districts, and a couple of participants commented that firms were responding to those pressures in a variety of ways, in- cluding investing in technology that could serve as a sub- stitute for labor. In their discussion of inflation developments, partici- pants noted that recent readings on overall and core PCE inflation, measured on a 12-month change basis, had continued to run below 2 percent. Survey-based Minutes of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ measures of longer-term inflation expectations were lit- tle changed, and market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low. A few participants com- mented on factors that may temporarily exert upward pressure on some measures of inflation in the coming months. Assessing all these factors, participants gener- ally expected that inflation would return to the 2 percent objective as the economic expansion continued and re- source utilization remained high. However, weakness abroad and subdued global inflation pressures were cited as sources of risk to this assessment. Participants who expressed less confidence that inflation would return promptly to the 2 percent objective commented that in- flation had averaged less than 2 percent over the past several years even as resource utilization had increased or that global or technology-related factors were exerting downward pressure on inflation that could be difficult to overcome. Participants also discussed risks regarding the outlook for economic activity. While many saw the risks as tilted somewhat to the downside, some risks were seen to have eased over recent months. In particular, there were some tentative signs that trade tensions with China were easing, and the probability of a no-deal Brexit was judged to have lessened further. In addition, there were indica- tions that the prospects for global economic growth may be stabilizing. A number of participants observed that the domestic economy was showing resilience in the face of headwinds from global developments. Moreover, sta- tistical models designed to gauge the probability of re- cession using financial market data, including those based on information from the Treasury yield curve, suggested that the likelihood of a recession occurring over the medium term had fallen noticeably in recent months. However, new uncertainties had emerged re- garding trade policy with Argentina, Brazil, and France, and political tensions in Hong Kong persisted. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants judged that it would be appropriate to main- tain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. As reflected in their SEP projections, participants regarded the current stance of monetary policy as likely to remain appropriate for a time as long as incoming information about the economy remained broadly consistent with the economic outlook. Of course, if developments emerged that led to a material reassessment of the outlook, the stance of policy would need to adjust in a way that fos- tered the Committee’s dual-mandate objectives. A number of participants agreed that maintaining the current stance of monetary policy would give the Com- mittee some time to assess the full effects on the econ- omy of its policy decisions and communications over the course of this year along with other information bearing on the economic outlook. Participants also discussed how maintaining the current stance of policy for a time could be helpful for cushioning the economy from the global developments that have been weighing on eco- nomic activity and for returning inflation to the Com- mittee’s symmetric objective of 2 percent. Participants generally expressed concerns regarding inflation contin- uing to fall short of 2 percent. Although a number of participants noted that some of the factors currently holding down inflation were likely to prove transitory, various participants were concerned that indicators were suggesting that the level of longer-term inflation expec- tations was too low. A few participants raised the concern that keeping inter- est rates low over a long period might encourage exces- sive risk-taking, which could exacerbate imbalances in the financial sector. These participants offered various perspectives on the relationship between financial stabil- ity and policies that keep interest rates persistently low. They remarked that such policies could be inconsistent with sustaining maximum employment, could make the next recession more severe than otherwise, or could strengthen the case for the active use of macroprudential tools to guard against emerging imbalances. Various participants remarked on issues related to the implementation of monetary policy, highlighting topics for further discussion at future meetings. Among the topics mentioned were the potential role of a standing repo facility in an ample-reserves regime, the setting of administered rates, and the composition of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities over the longer run. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members noted that information received since the FOMC met in October indicated that the labor market remained strong and that economic activity had been ris- ing at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on av- erage, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Although household spending had been rising at a strong pace, business fixed investment and ex- ports remained weak. On a 12-month basis, overall in- flation and inflation for items other than food and en- ergy were running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low; Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expecta- tions were little changed. Members agreed to maintain the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent. Members judged that the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. Members also agreed that, in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the fed- eral funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent infla- tion objective. And they concurred that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed to state that they judged that “the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate” to support the achievement of the Committee’s policy objectives. Members discussed their options regarding references to global developments and muted inflation pressures in the statement. In their judgment, these factors, cited in previous postmeeting statements as part of the rationale for adjusting the stance of policy, remained salient fea- tures of the outlook. Accordingly, they agreed to cite them in the sentence indicating that “the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming infor- mation for the economic outlook.” With the retention of these references to global developments and muted inflation pressures, members agreed that the text on un- certainties about the outlook could be removed. A few members suggested that the language stating that mone- tary policy would support inflation “near” 2 percent could be misinterpreted as suggesting that policymakers were comfortable with inflation running below that level; they preferred language that referred to returning inflation to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec- tive. Other members thought that the reference to “near” 2 percent was intended to encompass modest de- viations of inflation above and below 2 percent. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective December 12, 2019, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1½ to 1¾ percent. In light of recent and expected increases in the Federal Reserve’s non-reserve liabilities, the Committee directs the Desk to continue purchasing Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of 2020 to main- tain over time ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September 2019. The Committee also directs the Desk to continue conducting term and overnight repur- chase agreement operations at least through January 2020 to ensure that the supply of re- serves remains ample even during periods of sharp increases in non-reserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation. In addition, the Committee directs the Desk to conduct overnight reverse repurchase opera- tions (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 1.45 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and to continue reinvesting all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities received during each calendar month. Principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in Treasury securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities outstanding; principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in agency mortgage-backed securities. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Minutes of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Although household spending has been rising at a strong pace, business fixed investment and exports remain weak. On a 12‑month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are run- ning below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey- based measures of longer-term inflation expec- tations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent. The Committee judges that the current stance of monetary pol- icy is appropriate to support sustained expan- sion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of in- coming information for the economic outlook, including global developments and muted infla- tion pressures, as it assesses the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Richard H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Randal K. Quarles, and Eric S. Rosengren. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un- changed at 1.55 percent and voted unanimously to ap- prove establishment of the primary credit rate at the ex- isting level of 2.25 percent, effective December 12, 2019. Organizational Matters By unanimous vote, Lorie K. Logan was selected to serve at the pleasure of the Committee as manager, Sys- tem Open Market Account, on the understanding that her selection was subject to being satisfactory to the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of New York. Secretary’s note: Advice subsequently was re- ceived that the selection of Ms. Logan as man- ager was satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 28–29, 2020. The meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m. on Decem- ber 11, 2019. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on November 19, 2019, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on October 29–30, 2019. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- tee (FOMC) meeting held on December 10–11, 2019, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2019 to 2022 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on infor- mation available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy— including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer- run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projec- tions represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to con- verge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.1 “Ap- propriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to fos- ter outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Almost all participants expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth of real GDP in 2020 would run at or slightly above 1.9 percent, the median of current estimates of its longer-run rate. The median of the pro- jections for the growth rate of real GDP edges down each year over the projection horizon and, for 2022, is modestly below the median of the current estimates of its longer-run rate. The median of the current projec- tions for the unemployment rate was lower than that in the September Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) for each year of the projection period, and some participants reduced their estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment, resulting in a slight de- cline in the median estimate. The medians of the pro- jections for both total and core inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), increase sig- nificantly from 2019 to 2020 and more modestly in 2021 to reach 2 percent that year. Almost all participants ex- pected that inflation would be at or slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2021 and 2022. A couple more participants, relative to the September SEP, projected inflation to exceed 2 percent at some point 1 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. during the projection period. The medians of the pro- jections for both total and core inflation were unchanged for 2020 through 2022, compared with the September SEP. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. As shown in figure 2, a substantial majority of partici- pants indicated that their expectations regarding the evo- lution of the economy, relative to the Committee’s ob- jectives of maximum employment and 2 percent infla- tion, would likely warrant keeping the federal funds at its current level through the end of 2020. Compared with the September SEP submissions, the median projection for the federal funds rate was 25 basis points lower in each year over the projection period and retained its modest upward tilt in 2021 and 2022. The median of participants’ assessments of the appropriate level for the federal funds rate in 2022 was slightly below the median of estimates of its longer-run level; the median estimate of the longer-run level was unchanged from its value in the September SEP. Most participants regarded the uncertainties around their projections as broadly similar to the average over the past 20 years. The majority of participants continued to assess the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and for the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside. However, compared with the September submissions, several participants shifted their assessments of the balance of risks around these projections to being broadly balanced. Most participants judged the risks to their inflation outlook as broadly bal- anced, though one-third of participants viewed the risks to their inflation projections as weighted to the down- side; no participant assessed the risks to his or her infla- tion outlook as weighted to the upside. The uncertain- ties and risks around participants’ projections for head- line and core inflation were little changed from the Sep- tember SEP. The Outlook for Real GDP Growth and Unemploy- ment As shown in table 1, the medians of participants’ projec- tions for real GDP growth in 2019 and 2020, conditional on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, were 2.2 percent and 2.0 percent, respectively, a touch above the median estimate of the longer-run Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ , s t n e d i s e r p k n a B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F d n a s r e b m e m d r a o B e v r e s e R l a r e d e F f o s n o i t c e j o r p c i m o n o c E . 1 e l b a T 9 1 0 2 r e b m e c e D , y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p f o s n o i t p m u s s a l a u d i v i d n i r i e h t r e d n u r e g n o L n u r n u r 3 e g n a R 2 y c n e d n e T l a r t n e C 1 n a i d e M 2 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 r e g n o L 2 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 r e g n o L 2 2 0 2 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 9 1 0 2 e l b a i r a V t n e c r e P 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 2 . 2 – 5 . 1 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 2 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 3 . 2 – 8 . 1 3 . 2 – 7 . 1 3 . 2 – 1 . 2 4 . 2 – 1 . 2 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 7 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 1 . 2 3 . 2 – 1 . 2 5 . 4 – 5 . 3 5 . 4 – 6 . 3 1 . 4 – 3 . 3 2 . 4 – 3 . 3 0 . 4 – 3 . 3 1 . 4 – 3 . 3 8 . 3 – 3 . 3 0 . 4 – 3 . 3 6 . 3 – 5 . 3 8 . 3 – 5 . 3 3 . 4 – 9 . 3 3 . 4 – 0 . 4 0 . 4 – 5 . 3 0 . 4 – 7 . 3 9 . 3 – 5 . 3 9 . 3 – 6 . 3 7 . 3 – 5 . 3 8 . 3 – 6 . 3 6 . 3 – 5 . 3 7 . 3 – 6 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 3 . 2 – 8 . 1 3 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 7 . 1 – 4 . 1 7 . 1 – 4 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 2 . 2 – 8 . 1 3 . 2 – 8 . 1 3 . 2 – 8 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 1 . 2 – 7 . 1 8 . 1 – 6 . 1 8 . 1 – 6 . 1 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 2 . 2 – 0 . 2 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 9 . 1 – 8 . 1 0 . 2 – 8 . 1 5 . 1 – 4 . 1 6 . 1 – 5 . 1 1 . 2 – 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 0 . 2 – 9 . 1 7 . 1 – 6 . 1 8 . 1 – 7 . 1 n u r 9 . 1 9 . 1 1 . 4 2 . 4 0 . 2 0 . 2 8 . 1 8 . 1 7 . 3 9 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 9 . 1 9 . 1 6 . 3 8 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 2 5 . 3 7 . 3 9 . 1 9 . 1 9 . 1 9 . 1 2 . 2 2 . 2 6 . 3 7 . 3 5 . 1 5 . 1 6 . 1 8 . 1 n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S P D G l a e r n i e g n a h C n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n U n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S 4 n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o C n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P h t a p y c i l o p e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r P : o m e M 3 . 3 – 0 . 2 3 . 3 – 0 . 2 9 . 2 – 6 . 1 9 . 2 – 6 . 1 4 . 2 – 6 . 1 6 . 2 – 6 . 1 9 . 1 – 6 . 1 4 . 2 – 6 . 1 6 . 1 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 8 . 2 – 4 . 2 8 . 2 – 5 . 2 6 . 2 – 9 . 1 6 . 2 – 9 . 1 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 4 . 2 – 6 . 1 9 . 1 – 6 . 1 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 6 . 1 1 . 2 – 6 . 1 5 . 2 5 . 2 1 . 2 4 . 2 9 . 1 1 . 2 6 . 1 9 . 1 6 . 1 9 . 1 n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e F h t r u o f e h t m o r f s e g n a h c t n e c r e p e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i f o s e r u s a e m h t o b r o f s n o i t c e j o r p d n a ) P D G ( t c u d o r p c i t s e m o d s s o r g l a e r n i e g n a h c f o s n o i t c e j o r P : e t o N , y l e v i t c e p s e r , n i e g n a h c f o s e t a r e g a t n e c r e p e h t e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c d n a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t o t r a e y s u o i v e r p e h t f o r e t r a u q e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r P . y g r e n e d n a d o o f i g n d u l c x e E C P r o f x e d n i e c i r p e h t d n a ) E C P ( s e r u t i d n e p x e n o i t p m u s n o c l a n o s r e p r o f x e d n i e c i r p f o t n e m s s e s s a r e h r o s i h n o d e s a b e r a s n o i t c e j o r p s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a E . d e t a c i d n i r a e y e h t f o r e t r a u q h t r u o f e h t n i e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u n a i l i v i c e g a r e v a e h t r o f e h t e r a e g r e v n o c o t d e t c e p x e e b l d u o w e l b a i r a v h c a e h c i h w o t e t a r e h t f o t n e m s s e s s a s ’ t n a p i c i t r a p h c a e t n e s e r p e r s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a t n i o p d m e h t i f o e u l a v e h t e r a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p e h T . y m o n o c e e h t o t s k c o h s r e h t r u f f o e c n e s b a e h t n i d n a y c i l o p y r a t e n o m e t a i r p o r p p a r e d n u d e ﬁ i c e p s e h t f o d n e e h t t a e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f l e v e l t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t r o e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o f e g n a r t e g r a t e t a i r p o r p p a d e t c e j o r p e h t f o n o e e t t i m m o C t e k r a M n e p O l a r e d e F e h t f o g n i t e e m e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i e d a m e r e w s n o i t c e j o r p r e b m e t p e S e h T . n u r r e g n o l e h t r e v o r o r a e y r a d n e l a c n i e t a r s d n u f l a r e d e f e h t r o , e t a r t n e m y o l p m e n u e h t , P D G l a e r n i e g n a h c e h t r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o l t i m b u s t o n d d i t n a p i c i t r a p e n O . 9 1 0 2 , 8 1 - 7 1 r e b m e t p e S , 9 1 0 2 , 1 1 - 0 1 r e b m e c e D e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c n i s n o i t c e j o r p h c u s t i m b u s t o n i d d t n a p i c i t r a p e n o d n a , g n i t e e m , 9 1 0 2 , 8 1 - 7 1 r e b m e t p e S e h t h t i w n o i t c n u j n o c . g n i t e e m , n e v e s i s n o i t c e j o r p f o r e b m u n e h t n e h W . t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f d e g n a r r a e r a s n o i t c e j o r p e h t n e h w n o i t c e j o r p i e l d d m e h t s i n a i d e m e h t , d o i r e p h c a e r o F . 1 . r a e y t a h t n i e l b a i r a v t a h t r o f , t s e h g i h o t t s e w o l m o r f , s n o i t c e j o r p ’ s t n a p i c i t r a p l l a s e d u l c n i r a e y n e v i g a n i e l b a i r a v a r o f e g n a r . r a e y h c a e n i e l b a i r a v h c a e r o f s n o i t c e j o r p t s e w o l e e r h t d n a t s e h g i h e e r h t e h t s e d u l c x e y c n e d n e t l a r t n e c e h T e h T . d e t c e l l o c t o n e r a n o i t a ﬂ n i E C P e r o c r o f s n o i t c e j o r p n u r - r e g n o L . 2 . 3 . 4 . s n o i t c e j o r p e l i d d m o w t e h t f o e g a r e v a e h t s i n a i d e m e h t Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2019-22 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. 123201420152016201720182019202020212022Median of projectionsCentral tendency of projectionsRange of projectionsActualPercentChange in real GDPLongerrun34567201420152016201720182019202020212022PercentUnemployment rateLongerrun123201420152016201720182019202020212022PercentPCE inflationLongerrun123201420152016201720182019202020212022PercentCore PCE inflationLongerrunSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. 0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.02019202020212022Longer runPercentPage 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ growth rate of 1.9 percent. The median of the projec- tions for the growth rate of real GDP declines slowly over the projection horizon and, in 2022, is modestly be- low the median of the current estimates of its longer-run rate. The medians of the projections for real GDP growth in all four years of the projection period, as well as in the longer run, were unchanged from the Septem- ber SEP. A majority of participants marked down their projec- tions of the unemployment rate in each year of the pro- jection period, and some participants lowered their esti- mates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. As a result, the medians of the projections for the unem- ployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2020 through 2022 were 3.5 percent, 3.6 percent, and 3.7 percent, re- spectively, each 0.2 percentage point lower than in the September projections. The median estimate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was 4.1 per- cent, 0.1 percentage point lower than in September. Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- ployment rate, respectively, from 2019 to 2022 and in the longer run. The distribution of individual projec- tions for real GDP growth for 2020 tilted slightly higher, as many participants upgraded their projections a bit rel- ative to those in the September SEP, although the me- dian projection was unchanged. The distributions of in- dividual projections of real GDP growth in 2021 and 2022 and in the longer run were little changed overall. The distributions of individual projections for the unem- ployment rate from 2020 to 2022 and in the longer run shifted lower relative to those in September. The Outlook for Inflation As shown in table 1, the median projection for core PCE price inflation was 1.6 percent for 2019, a modest de- crease from the September projections. The medians of the projections for both total and core PCE price infla- tion were each 1.9 percent in 2020 and 2.0 percent in both 2021 and 2022—all unchanged from September. Figures 3.C and 3.D show the distributions of partici- pants’ views about their outlooks for inflation. Al- though the medians of the projections for total and core PCE price inflation from 2020 through 2022 were un- changed from the September SEP, a couple more par- ticipants projected inflation to be slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2022. Appropriate Monetary Policy Figure 3.E shows the distributions of participants’ judg- ments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2019 to 2022 and over the longer run. A substantial majority of participants projected a federal funds rate of 1.63 percent for the end of 2020. Four participants assessed that the most likely appropriate rate at year-end for 2020 would be 1.88 percent. For subse- quent years, the medians of the projections were 1.88 percent at the end of 2021 and 2.13 percent at the end of 2022. The distribution of participants’ estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate was little changed, and the median estimate was unchanged from September at 2.50 percent. Compared with the projections prepared for the Sep- tember SEP, a number of participants marked down their assessments of the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2020, reflecting in part the re- duction in the target range at the October meeting and causing both the range and central tendency of projec- tions for 2020 to narrow considerably. Some partici- pants lowered their projections for the appropriate level in 2021 and 2022. The median projection for the federal funds rate was 25 basis points lower in each year in the projection period. Realized inflation running persis- tently below target and risks associated with trade policy and foreign economic growth were cited as key factors informing participants’ judgments about the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. Uncertainty and Risks In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast errors of various private and government forecasts over the past 20 years—for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are represented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts display the SEP medians for the three variables sur- rounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the de- gree of uncertainty attending these projections is similar to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 percent probability of being within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of uncer- tainty is substantial and generally increases as the fore- cast horizon lengthens. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2019-22 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618 1.4−1.5 1.6−1.7 1.8−1.9 2.0−2.1 2.2−2.3 2.4−2.5Percent range December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participants201924681012141618 1.4−1.5 1.6−1.7 1.8−1.9 2.0−2.1 2.2−2.3 2.4−2.5Percent rangeNumber of participants202024681012141618 1.4−1.5 1.6−1.7 1.8−1.9 2.0−2.1 2.2−2.3 2.4−2.5Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618 1.4−1.5 1.6−1.7 1.8−1.9 2.0−2.1 2.2−2.3 2.4−2.5Percent rangeNumber of participants202224681012141618 1.4−1.5 1.6−1.7 1.8−1.9 2.0−2.1 2.2−2.3 2.4−2.5Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runPage 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2019-22 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618 3.2−3.3 3.4−3.5 3.6−3.7 3.8−3.9 4.0−4.1 4.2−4.3 4.4−4.5 4.6−4.7Percent range December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participants201924681012141618 3.2−3.3 3.4−3.5 3.6−3.7 3.8−3.9 4.0−4.1 4.2−4.3 4.4−4.5 4.6−4.7Percent rangeNumber of participants202024681012141618 3.2−3.3 3.4−3.5 3.6−3.7 3.8−3.9 4.0−4.1 4.2−4.3 4.4−4.5 4.6−4.7Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618 3.2−3.3 3.4−3.5 3.6−3.7 3.8−3.9 4.0−4.1 4.2−4.3 4.4−4.5 4.6−4.7Percent rangeNumber of participants202224681012141618 3.2−3.3 3.4−3.5 3.6−3.7 3.8−3.9 4.0−4.1 4.2−4.3 4.4−4.5 4.6−4.7Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2019-22 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent range December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participants201924681012141618 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants202024681012141618 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants202224681012141618 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runPage 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂation, 2019-22 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent range December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participants201924681012141618 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants202024681012141618 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants2022Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2019-22 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618 1.38−1.62 1.63−1.87 1.88−2.12 2.13−2.37 2.38−2.62 2.63−2.87 2.88−3.12 3.13−3.37 3.38−3.62Percent range December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participants201924681012141618 1.38−1.62 1.63−1.87 1.88−2.12 2.13−2.37 2.38−2.62 2.63−2.87 2.88−3.12 3.13−3.37 3.38−3.62Percent rangeNumber of participants202024681012141618 1.38−1.62 1.63−1.87 1.88−2.12 2.13−2.37 2.38−2.62 2.63−2.87 2.88−3.12 3.13−3.37 3.38−3.62Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618 1.38−1.62 1.63−1.87 1.88−2.12 2.13−2.37 2.38−2.62 2.63−2.87 2.88−3.12 3.13−3.37 3.38−3.62Percent rangeNumber of participants202224681012141618 1.38−1.62 1.63−1.87 1.88−2.12 2.13−2.37 2.38−2.62 2.63−2.87 2.88−3.12 3.13−3.37 3.38−3.62Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runPage 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Variable 2019 2020 2021 2022 Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.6 ±2.0 ±2.0 Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.1 ±0.8 ±1.5 ±1.9 Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.2 ±0.9 ±1.0 ±0.9 Short-term interest rates3 . . . ±0.1 ±1.4 ±2.0 ±2.4 NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 1999 through 2018 that were released in the winter by various private and government fore- casters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out- comes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschnei- der and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- rounding their individual economic projections are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. A substantial majority of participants viewed the uncertainty surrounding each of the four economic var- iables as being broadly similar to the average over the past 20 years. Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric around the median projections, they do not reflect any asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess- ments of the balance of risks to their current economic projections are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig- ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Relative to the September SEP, more participants saw the risks to the outlook for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as broadly bal- anced, although a small majority continued to view the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and for the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside. Most participants continued to judge the risks to their inflation outlook as broadly bal- anced, while some participants viewed the risks to their inflation outlook as weighted to the downside. No par- ticipant assessed the risks to his or her inflation outlook as weighted to the upside. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, some participants mentioned trade developments and concerns about foreign eco- nomic growth as sources of uncertainty or downside risk to the U.S. economic growth outlook. In contrast, the underlying strength of both consumer spending and the labor market was cited as balancing the risks around the growth outlook. In addition, most of the participants who shifted their balance of risks for output growth to “broadly balanced” cited more accommodative mone- tary policy as a contributing factor. For the inflation out- look, the possibility that inflation expectations could be drifting below levels consistent with the FOMC’s 2 per- cent inflation objective was viewed as a downside risk. A couple of participants mentioned higher tariffs as a source of upside risk to their inflation outlook. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the federal funds rate in response to actual and prospective devel- opments over time in key economic variables—such as real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion—uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the federal funds rate importantly reflects the uncertain- ties about the paths for these economic variables, along with other factors. Figure 5 provides a graphic represen- tation of this uncertainty, plotting the SEP median for the federal funds rate surrounded by symmetric confi- dence intervals derived from the results presented in ta- ble 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the fed- eral funds rate is substantial and increases for longer ho- rizons. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.A. Uncertainty and risks in projections of GDP growth Median projection and conﬁdence interval based on historical forecast errors FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” 01234201420152016201720182019202020212022Median of projections70% confidence intervalActualPercentChange in real GDP24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigher December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participantsUncertainty about GDP growth24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupside December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participantsRisks to GDP growthPage 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.B. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the unemployment rate Median projection and conﬁdence interval based on historical forecast errors FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” 12345678910201420152016201720182019202020212022Median of projections70% confidence intervalActualPercentUnemployment rate24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigher December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participantsUncertainty about the unemployment rate24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupside December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participantsRisks to the unemployment rateSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4.C. Uncertainty and risks in projections of PCE inﬂation Median projection and conﬁdence interval based on historical forecast errors FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking, participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as “broadly similar” to the average levels of the past 20 years would view the width of the conﬁdence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the conﬁdence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For deﬁnitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” 0123201420152016201720182019202020212022Median of projections70% confidence intervalActualPercentPCE inflation24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigher December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participantsUncertainty about PCE inflation24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupside December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participantsRisks to PCE inflation24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigher December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participantsUncertainty about core PCE inflation24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupside December projectionsSeptember projectionsNumber of participantsRisks to core PCE inflationPage 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 5. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the federal funds rate Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level. The conﬁdence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The conﬁdence interval is not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, primarily because these projections are not forecasts of the likeliest outcomes for the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy. Still, historical forecast errors provide a broad sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to onset the eﬀects of shocks to the economy. The conﬁdence interval is assumed to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero - the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current conditions may diﬀer from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the conﬁdence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reﬂect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections. * The conﬁdence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth quarter of the year indicated; more information about these data is available in table 2. The shaded area encompasses less than a 70 percent conﬁdence interval if the conﬁdence interval has been truncated at zero. 0123456201420152016201720182019202020212022Midpoint of target rangeMedian of projections70% confidence interval*ActualPercentFederal funds rateSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of December 10–11, 2019Page 15_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- tial costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the second year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the third and fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent con- fidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.8 to 2.2 per- cent in the current year, 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the second year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the third year, and 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these con- fidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and cen- tered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. How- ever, in some instances, the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate can- not be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or the down- side, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig- ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par- ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather than below their projections. These judgments are summa- rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone- tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac- tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri- ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. If at some point in the future the confidence interval around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention; it would not have any implications for possible future policy decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1 provides information on the range of views across FOMC participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections across participants is much smaller than the average forecast errors over the past 20 years. Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 



Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee January 28–29, 2020 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, January 28, 2020, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, January 29, 2020, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chairman John C. Williams, Vice Chairman Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Patrick Harker Robert S. Kaplan Neel Kashkari Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, and Michael Strine,2 Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Marc Giannoni, Joseph W. Gruber, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Mark L.J. Wright, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Eric Belsky,3 Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors; Matthew J. Eichner,4 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Steven B. Kamin, Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Brian M. Doyle, Wendy E. Dunn, Ellen E. Meade, and Ivan Vidangos, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson and David W. Skidmore, Assistants to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors David Bowman,5 Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Eric M. Engen and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; John W. Schindler, Senior 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 3 Attended through the discussion of the review of the mon- etary policy framework. 4 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. 5 Attended the discussion of developments in financial mar- kets and open market operations. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Don H. Kim and Edward Nelson, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Eric C. Engstrom, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, and Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Elizabeth Klee,3 Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Christopher J. Gust,5 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Norman J. Morin and Steven A. Sharpe, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,4 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Paul R. Wood,3 Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Ricardo Correa and Stephanie E. Curcuru,6 Assistant Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Giovanni Favara and Zeynep Senyuz,5 Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors; Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Hess T. Chung,3 Group Manager, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo, Jonathan E. Goldberg, Judit Temesvary, and Francisco Vazquez-Grande, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Daniel J. Vine, Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Francesco Ferrante, Senior Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Michael Siemer,3 Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Manjola Tase, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors James Hebden,3 Senior Technology Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mark A. Gould, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco David Altig,3 Kartik B. Athreya, Jeffrey Fuhrer, Anna Paulson, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Boston, Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively Julie Ann Remache,5 Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl,5 and Keith Sill, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia, respectively Jonathan P. McCarthy, Ed Nosal, Matthew D. Raskin,5 and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Atlanta, New York, and New York, respectively Larry Wall,3 Executive Director, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Òscar Jordà, Senior Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Edward S. Prescott,3 Senior Economist and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Brent Bundick, Research and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Annual Organizational Matters7 The agenda for this meeting reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate mem- bers of the Federal Open Market Committee for a term beginning January 28, 2020, were received and that these individuals executed their oaths of office. 6 Attended the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. 7 Committee organizational documents are available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_au- thorizations.htm. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The elected members and alternate members were as fol- lows: John C. Williams, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with Michael Strine, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate Patrick Harker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, with Thomas I. Barkin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate Loretta J. Mester, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, with Charles L. Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate Robert S. Kaplan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, with Raphael W. Bostic, President of the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate Neel Kashkari, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, with Mary C. Daly, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Com- mittee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2021: Chairman Vice Chairman Secretary Deputy Secretary Assistant Secretary Jerome H. Powell John C. Williams James A. Clouse Matthew M. Luecke Michelle A. Smith Mark E. Van Der Weide General Counsel Michael Held Richard M. Ashton Thomas Laubach Stacey Tevlin Beth Anne Wilson Deputy General Counsel Assistant General Counsel Economist Economist Economist Shaghil Ahmed Michael Dotsey Marc Giannoni Joseph W. Gruber Beverly Hirtle David E. Lebow Trevor A. Reeve Ellis W. Tallman William Wascher Mark L.J. Wright Associate Economists By unanimous vote, the Committee selected the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account (SOMA). By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Lorie K. Logan to serve at the pleasure of the Committee as man- ager of the SOMA, on the understanding that her selec- tion was subject to being satisfactory to the Federal Re- serve Bank of New York. Secretary’s note: The Federal Reserve Bank of New York subsequently sent advice that the manager selection indicated previously was sat- isfactory. By unanimous vote, the Committee voted to reaffirm without revision the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations as shown below. The Guidelines for the Conduct of System Open Market Operations in Fed- eral-Agency Issues remained suspended. AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MAR- KET OPERATIONS (As reaffirmed effective January 28, 2020) OPEN MARKET TRANSACTIONS 1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com- mittee”) authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee to execute open market trans- actions (the “Selected Bank”), to the extent necessary to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted by the Committee: A. To buy or sell in the open market securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to prin- cipal and interest by, the United States, and securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the United States, that are eligible for purchase or sale under Sec- tion 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (“Eligible Secu- rities”) for the System Open Market Account (“SOMA”): i. As an outright operation with securities dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained at the Selected Bank: on a same-day or deferred de- livery basis (including such transactions as are com- monly referred to as dollar rolls and coupon swaps) at market prices; or ii. As a temporary operation: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis, to purchase such Eligible Se- curities subject to an agreement to resell (“repo transactions”) or to sell such Eligible Securities sub- ject to an agreement to repurchase (“reverse repo transactions”) for a term of 65 business days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise authorized by the Committee, are determined by competitive bidding, _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 28–29, 2020Page 3 after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual counterparties; B. To allow Eligible Securities in the SOMA to ma- ture without replacement; C. To exchange, at market prices, in connection with a Treasury auction, maturing Eligible Securities in the SOMA with the Treasury, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct obligations of the United States or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States; and D. To exchange, at market prices, maturing Eligible Securities in the SOMA with an agency of the United States, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct obligations of that agency or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by that agency. SECURITIES LENDING 2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, the Committee authorizes the Se- lected Bank to operate a program to lend Eligible Secu- rities held in the SOMA to dealers on an overnight basis (except that the Selected Bank may lend Eligible Securi- ties for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions). A. Such securities lending must be: i. At rates determined by competitive bidding; ii. At a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives of the program; iii. Subject to reasonable limitations on the total amount of a specific issue of Eligible Securities that may be auctioned; and limitations on the iv. Subject to reasonable amount of Eligible Securities that each borrower may borrow. B. The Selected Bank may: Reject bids that, as determined in its sole dis- i. cretion, could facilitate a bidder’s ability to control a single issue; ii. Accept Treasury securities or cash as collateral for any loan of securities authorized in this para- graph 2; and iii. Accept agency securities as collateral only for a loan of agency securities authorized in this para- graph 2. OPERATIONAL READINESS TESTING 3. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to undertake transactions of the type described in para- graphs 1 and 2 from time to time for the purpose of test- ing operational readiness, subject to the following limi- tations: A. All transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 shall be conducted with prior notice to the Commit- tee; B. The aggregate par value of the transactions au- thorized in this paragraph 3 that are of the type de- scribed in paragraph 1.A.i, 1.B, 1.C and 1.D shall not exceed $5 billion per calendar year; and C. The outstanding amount of the transactions de- scribed in paragraphs 1.A.ii and 2 shall not exceed $5 billion at any given time. TRANSACTIONS WITH CUSTOMER ACCOUNTS In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 4. market operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments or other authorized services for foreign central bank and international accounts main- tained at a Federal Reserve Bank (the “Foreign Ac- counts”) and accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States pursuant to sec- tion 15 of the Federal Reserve Act (together with the Foreign Accounts, the “Customer Accounts”), the Com- mittee authorizes the following when undertaken on terms comparable to those available in the open market: A. The Selected Bank, for the SOMA, to undertake reverse repo transactions in Eligible Securities held in the SOMA with the Customer Accounts for a term of 65 business days or less; and B. Any Federal Reserve Bank that maintains Cus- tomer Accounts, for any such Customer Account, when appropriate and subject to all other necessary authorization and approvals, to: i. Undertake repo transactions in Eligible Securi- ties with dealers with a corresponding reverse repo transaction in such Eligible Securities with the Cus- tomer Accounts; and ii. Undertake intra-day repo transactions in Eligi- ble Securities with Foreign Accounts. Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts un- der the provisions of this paragraph 4 may provide for a service fee when appropriate. Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts are also subject to the authori- zation or approval of other entities, including the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and, when involving accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States, the United States Department of the Treasury. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ ADDITIONAL MATTERS 5. The Committee authorizes the Chairman of the Committee, in fostering the Committee’s objectives dur- ing any period between meetings of the Committee, to instruct the Selected Bank to act on behalf of the Com- mittee to: A. Adjust somewhat in exceptional circumstances the stance of monetary policy and to take actions that may result in material changes in the composition and size of the assets in the SOMA; or B. Undertake transactions with respect to Eligible Securities in order to appropriately address temporary disruptions of an operational or highly unusual nature in U.S. dollar funding markets. Any such adjustment described in subparagraph A of this paragraph 5 shall be made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and decision about the stance of policy at its most recent meeting and the Committee’s long-run objectives to foster maximum employment and price stability, and shall be based on economic, financial, and monetary developments since the most recent meet- ing of the Committee. The Chairman, whenever feasi- ble, will consult with the Committee before making any instruction under this paragraph 5. The Committee voted unanimously to reaffirm without revision the Authorization for Foreign Currency Opera- tions and the Foreign Currency Directive as shown be- low. AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS (As reaffirmed effective January 28, 2020) IN GENERAL 1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com- mittee”) authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to execute open market transactions for the System Open Market Ac- count as provided in this Authorization, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee: A. To purchase and sell foreign currencies (also known as cable transfers) at home and abroad in the open market, including with the United States Treas- ury, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with other entities in the open market. This authorization to purchase and sell foreign currencies encompasses purchases and sales through standalone spot or forward transactions and through foreign exchange swap transactions. For purposes of this Authorization, foreign exchange swap transactions are: swap transactions with the United States Treasury (also known as warehousing transactions), swap transactions with other central banks under reciprocal currency arrangements, swap transactions with other central banks under standing dollar liquidity and foreign currency liquidity swap ar- rangements, and swap transactions with other entities in the open market. B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding for- ward contracts to receive or to deliver, foreign curren- cies. 2. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall, unless otherwise authorized by the Committee, be conducted: In a manner consistent with the obligations re- A. garding exchange arrangements under Article IV of the Articles of Agreement of the International Mone- tary Fund (IMF).1 In close and continuous cooperation and consul- B. tation, as appropriate, with the United States Treasury. C. In consultation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities, foreign central banks, and inter- national monetary institutions. D. At prevailing market rates. STANDALONE SPOT AND FORWARD TRANS- ACTIONS 3. For any operation that involves standalone spot or forward transactions in foreign currencies: A. Approval of such operation is required as fol- lows: i. The Committee must direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and for- ward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Authorization, exceeding $5 billion since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the Committee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”) must direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the opera- tion if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the Committee is not feasible in the time avail- able. ii. The Committee authorizes the Subcommittee to direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Au- thorization, totaling $5 billion or less since the close _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 28–29, 2020Page 5 of the most recent regular meeting of the Commit- tee. B. Such an operation also shall be: i. Generally directed at countering disorderly market conditions; or ii. Undertaken to adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for currencies; or iii. Conducted for such other purposes as may be determined by the Committee. C. For purposes of this Authorization, the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregard- ing signs) of the dollar values of individual foreign cur- rencies purchased and sold, valued at the time of the transaction. WAREHOUSING 4. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank, with the prior approval of the Subcommittee and at the re- quest of the United States Treasury, to conduct swap transactions with the United States Exchange Stabiliza- tion Fund established by section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934 under agreements in which the Selected Bank purchases foreign currencies from the Exchange Stabilization Fund and the Exchange Stabilization Fund repurchases the foreign currencies from the Selected Bank at a later date (such purchases and sales also known as warehousing). RECIPROCAL CURRENCY ARRANGEMENTS, AND STANDING DOLLAR AND FOREIGN CURRENCY LIQUIDITY SWAPS 5. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements established under the North American Framework Agreement, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and stand- ing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements as pro- vided in this Authorization and to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Com- mittee. A. For reciprocal currency arrangements all draw- ings must be approved in advance by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee be- lieves that consultation with the Committee is not fea- sible in the time available). B. For standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the Chairman. The Chairman may approve a schedule of potential drawings, and may delegate to the manager, System Open Market Account, the authority to ap- prove individual drawings that occur according to the schedule approved by the Chairman. C. For standing foreign currency liquidity swap ar- rangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the Committee is not feasible in the time available). D. Operations involving standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements and standing foreign currency li- quidity swap arrangements shall generally be directed at countering strains in financial markets in the United States or abroad, or reducing the risk that they could emerge, so as to mitigate their effects on economic and financial conditions in the United States. E. For reciprocal currency arrangements, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing for- eign currency liquidity swap arrangements: Any new arrangements must be approved by i. All arrangements are subject to annual review and approval by the Committee; ii. the Committee; and iii. Any changes in the terms of existing arrange- ments must be approved in advance by the Chair- man. The Chairman shall keep the Committee in- formed of any changes in terms, and the terms shall be consistent with principles discussed with and guidance provided by the Committee. OTHER OPERATIONS IN FOREIGN CURREN- CIES 6. Any other operations in foreign currencies for which governance is not otherwise specified in this Au- thorization (such as foreign exchange swap transactions with private-sector counterparties) must be authorized and directed in advance by the Committee. FOREIGN CURRENCY HOLDINGS 7. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to hold foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac- count in accounts maintained at foreign central banks, the Bank for International Settlements, and such other foreign institutions as approved by the Board of Gover- nors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee. A. The Selected Bank shall manage all holdings of foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac- count: Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Secondarily, to maintain a high degree of Primarily, to ensure sufficient liquidity to ena- i. ble the Selected Bank to conduct foreign currency operations as directed by the Committee; ii. safety; iii. Subject to paragraphs 7.A.i and 7.A.ii, to pro- vide the highest rate of return possible in each cur- rency; and iv. To achieve such other objectives as may be au- thorized by the Committee. B. The Selected Bank may manage such foreign cur- rency holdings by: Purchasing and selling obligations of, or fully i. guaranteed as to principal and interest by, a foreign government or agency thereof (“Permitted Foreign Securities”) through outright purchases and sales; ii. Purchasing Permitted Foreign Securities under agreements for repurchase of such Permitted For- eign Securities and selling such securities under agreements for the resale of such securities; and iii. Managing balances in various time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions approved by the Board of Governors under Regulation N. C. The Subcommittee, in consultation with the Committee, may provide additional instructions to the Selected Bank regarding holdings of foreign curren- cies. ADDITIONAL MATTERS 8. The Committee authorizes the Chairman: A. With the prior approval of the Committee, to en- ter into any needed agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the United States Treasury about the division of responsibility for foreign currency opera- tions between the System and the United States Treas- ury; B. To advise the Secretary of the United States Treasury concerning System foreign currency opera- tions, and to consult with the Secretary on policy mat- ters relating to foreign currency operations; C. To designate Federal Reserve System persons au- thorized to communicate with the United States Treasury concerning System Open Market Account foreign currency operations; and D. From time to time, to transmit appropriate re- ports and information to the National Advisory Coun- cil on International Monetary and Financial Policies. 9. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to undertake transactions of the type described in this Au- thorization, and foreign exchange and investment transactions that it may be otherwise authorized to undertake, from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness. The aggregate amount of such transactions shall not exceed $2.5 billion per calendar year. These transactions shall be conducted with prior notice to the Committee. 10. All Federal Reserve banks shall participate in the foreign currency operations for System Open Market Account in accordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Governors’ Statement of Procedure with Re- spect to Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944. 11. Any authority of the Subcommittee pursuant to this Authorization may be exercised by the Chairman if the Chairman believes that consultation with the Sub- committee is not feasible in the time available. The Chairman shall promptly report to the Subcommittee any action approved by the Chairman pursuant to this paragraph. 12. The Committee authorizes the Chairman, in excep- tional circumstances where it would not be feasible to convene the Committee, to foster the Committee’s ob- jectives by instructing the Selected Bank to engage in foreign currency operations not otherwise authorized pursuant to this Authorization. Any such action shall be made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and decisions regarding foreign currency operations. The Chairman, whenever feasible, will consult with the Com- mittee before making any instruction under this para- graph. __________________________ 1 In general, as specified in Article IV, each member of the IMF undertakes to collaborate with the IMF and other mem- bers to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates. These obligations include seeking to direct the member’s economic and financial policies toward the objective of fostering orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability. These obligations also include avoiding manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in such a way that would impede effective balance of payments adjustment or to give an unfair competi- tive advantage over other members. FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE (As reaffirmed effective January 28, 2020) 1. The Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to ex- ecute open market transactions, for the System Open Market Account, in accordance with the provisions of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations (the “Authorization”) and subject to the limits in this Di- rective. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 28–29, 2020Page 7 2. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to exe- cute warehousing transactions, if so requested by the United States Treasury and if approved by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”), subject to the limitation that the outstanding balance of United States dollars provided to the United States Treasury as a result of these transactions not at any time exceed $5 billion. 3. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to main- tain, for the System Open Market Account: A. Reciprocal currency arrangements with the fol- lowing foreign central banks: Foreign central bank Maximum amount (millions of dollars or equivalent) Bank of Canada Bank of Mexico 2,000 3,000 Standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements with B. the following foreign central banks: Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank C. Standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrange- ments with the following foreign central banks: Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank 4. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to hold and to invest foreign currencies in the portfolio in ac- cordance with the provisions of paragraph 7 of the Au- thorization. 5. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to report to the Committee, at each regular meeting of the Com- mittee, on transactions undertaken pursuant to para- graphs 1 and 6 of the Authorization. The Selected Bank is also directed to provide quarterly reports to the Com- mittee regarding the management of the foreign cur- rency holdings pursuant to paragraph 7 of the Authori- zation. 6. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to con- duct testing of transactions for the purpose of opera- tional readiness in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9 of the Authorization. By unanimous vote, the Committee amended its Pro- gram for Security of FOMC Information (Program) with three sets of changes, effective February 1, 2020. These changes consisted of (1) an update to the rules for eligi- bility for access to FOMC information to reflect two new policies approved by the Board; (2) the addition of references to existing Federal Reserve polices that help safeguard FOMC information; and (3) organizational and technical changes to improve the consistency and accuracy of Program language. By unanimous vote, the Committee provided approval for the publication of a Federal Register notice of proposed rulemaking that seeks public comment on minor and technical updates to the FOMC Rules Regarding Avail- ability of Information, which are the Committee’s Free- dom of Information Act rules. Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices Participants continued their discussion related to the on- going review of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. At this meeting, the discussion focused on two topics: the po- tential interactions between monetary policy and finan- cial stability and the potential use of inflation ranges around the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. The staff briefing on the first topic noted that in the cur- rent environment of low neutral rates, achieving the Committee’s dual-mandate goals of maximum employ- ment and price stability would require low policy rates frequently, regardless of the monetary policy strategy and tools chosen. Consequently, policy strategies and tools that help support a stronger economy and anchor inflation expectations at a level consistent with the Com- mittee’s objective in a low-neutral-rate environment can help promote financial stability. In addition, the staff reported that the available empirical evidence suggests that the effects of changes in policy rates on asset prices and risk premiums tend to be modest relative to the his- torical fluctuations in those measures. However, there may be circumstances in which a persistently accommo- dative policy stance that is otherwise consistent with the dual-mandate goals may contribute to an increase in fi- nancial system vulnerabilities, including through in- creased borrowing, financial leverage, and valuation pressures. The staff noted that clear communications of Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the Committee’s ongoing assessments of the interac- tions between monetary policy and financial stability could help avoid large interest rate surprises that could otherwise contribute to financial vulnerabilities. The briefing concluded with a short review of how other cen- tral banks have approached this issue, including the use of financial instability escape clauses to provide leeway for the central bank to deviate from its usual monetary policy strategy if financial vulnerabilities become signifi- cant. In their discussion of the effects that alternative mone- tary policy strategies and tools might have on financial stability, participants noted that macroeconomic stability and the achievement of the Committee’s dual mandate depended on a stable financial system. An unstable fi- nancial system may amplify shocks to the economy and exacerbate increases in unemployment or drive inflation further away from the Committee’s goal. With respect to the relationship between monetary policy and finan- cial stability, some participants noted that evidence re- garding the link between the policy stance and elevated financial vulnerabilities was limited, with a couple of par- ticipants further observing that there were not many ep- isodes of persistently low interest rates. In addition, some past episodes of heightened financial vulnerabili- ties were associated with excessive risk-taking behavior that did not seem to be very responsive to typical changes in interest rates. A number of participants judged that, under some circumstances, low policy rates might help foster financial stability provided they are needed to support strong economic conditions and price stability. Some participants remarked, however, that keeping policy rates low to achieve both of the Commit- tee’s dual-mandate objectives may contribute to a buildup of financial vulnerabilities, especially at times when the economy is at or above full employment, a de- velopment that could pose future risks to the economy and to the ability of the Committee to achieve its dual mandate. Participants discussed how financial stability considera- tions should be incorporated in the conduct of monetary policy. They generally agreed that supervisory, regula- tory, and macroprudential tools should be the primary means to address financial stability risks. A few partici- pants commented that this is especially the case when addressing risks associated with structural features such as the current low level of neutral interest rates. A num- ber of participants noted that countercyclical macropru- dential tools, such as the countercyclical capital buffer, could be used to address cyclical financial stability risks. However, various participants noted that while these tools could be deployed proactively to lean against the buildup of financial vulnerabilities, they have some limi- tations in the context of the U.S. financial system, where the few available tools are, for the most part, not de- signed to address vulnerabilities outside the banking sec- tor. In addition, these tools are not within the authority of the Committee, and their use requires coordination with other prudential regulators. Recognizing these lim- itations, many participants remarked that the Committee should not rule out the possibility of adjusting the stance of monetary policy to mitigate financial stability risks, particularly when those risks have important implica- tions for the economic outlook and when macropruden- tial tools had been or were likely to be ineffective at mit- igating those risks. Nevertheless, many participants noted that the current knowledge of the interactions be- tween the stance of monetary policy and financial vul- nerabilities is too imprecise to warrant systematically ad- justing monetary policy in response to the evolution of financial stability risks. As a result, monetary policy should be guided primarily by the outlook for employ- ment and inflation, and it should respond to financial stability risks only insofar as such risks significantly threaten the achievement of the Committee’s mandate. Several participants observed that the monetary policy measures needed to curb financial stability risks could be quite large, and the resulting effects on employment and inflation could place a high hurdle for such measures. Some participants remarked that, because financial sta- bility risks are a consideration for achieving the Commit- tee’s dual mandate, a clear communications strategy would be needed to convey the Committee’s assess- ments of financial vulnerabilities and their potential im- plications for the monetary policy outlook. Several par- ticipants noted that a communications strategy could in- clude the possible use of financial instability escape clauses to help explain the rationale for policy actions when a buildup of financial vulnerabilities poses risks to the achievement of the Committee’s goals. The staff’s briefing on considerations regarding the use of an inflation range focused on three different concepts of an inflation range. First, an uncertainty range could communicate the magnitude of the inherent variability of inflation that would still be consistent with achieving the Committee’s symmetric inflation objective. Second, an operational range could signal that, under some condi- tions, the Committee would prefer inflation to be away from its longer-run objective for a time; such a range could potentially be used as part of a makeup policy strategy, including one based on average inflation target- ing, or in other strategies aimed at offsetting the adverse _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 28–29, 2020Page 9 effects of a binding effective lower bound on policy rates. Third, an indifference range could communicate that monetary policy would not respond to deviations of in- flation within that range. The briefing also summarized the experiences of foreign central banks that use infla- tion ranges; these ranges were typically put in place many years ago, often in conjunction with adopting an infla- tion target. The staff highlighted the communications challenges that could arise if an inflation range were in- troduced at a time when inflation had been running be- low the central bank’s objective for a number of years. In this environment, the introduction of a symmetric range around the point objective could be misinter- preted as a sign that the central bank was not concerned about inflation remaining below its stated goal, a situa- tion that could lead to inflation expectations drifting down to the lower end of the range. Participants expressed a range of views on the potential benefits and costs of different types of inflation ranges. Most participants expressed concern that introducing a symmetric inflation range around the 2 percent objective following an extended period of inflation mostly running somewhat below 2 percent could be misperceived as a signal that the Committee was comfortable with contin- ued misses below its symmetric inflation objective. Many participants agreed that an uncertainty range could be misinterpreted as an indifference range and hence as a lack of commitment by the Committee to its symmet- ric 2 percent inflation objective. Some participants sug- gested that it was not clear that introducing a range would help much in achieving the Committee’s inflation objective; they noted that introducing a range could make that objective less clear to the public. Instead of establishing a range, the Committee could continue to communicate that its inflation objective was symmetric around 2 percent. While inflation is inherently variable, the Committee then could emphasize its intention for inflation to be centered on the 2 percent objective. Nev- ertheless, in view of the inherent variability of inflation, several participants judged that there could be some ben- efit in communicating the inflation objective with a sym- metric range around the point target. In addition, a few participants suggested that an inflation range could con- vey the uncertainty associated with the available array of inflation measures or that the Committee’s communica- tions could more explicitly reference other measures of inflation. Several participants also stated that employing an asymmetric operational range for a time—with 2 per- cent being at or near the lower end of that range—while still maintaining the longer-run target of 2 percent could help communicate that the Committee intended infla- tion to average 2 percent over time, which in turn could help keep longer-run inflation expectations at levels con- sistent with its objective. Participants expected that, at upcoming meetings, they would continue their deliberations on the Committee’s review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communi- cation practices. Participants continued to anticipate that the review will likely be completed around the mid- dle of this year. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The SOMA manager reviewed developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. For most of the period, risk asset prices rose as market participants fo- cused on a perceived reduction in downside risks to the economic outlook, favorable data on foreign economic activity, and expectations of continued monetary policy accommodation in the United States and other major economies. Some market participants suggested that the Federal Reserve’s actions in the fourth quarter to main- tain ample reserve levels might have contributed to some degree to the rise in equity and other risk asset prices. Over the final few days of the intermeeting period, fi- nancial markets responded to news of the spread of the coronavirus that started in China, which reportedly con- tributed to downward moves in Treasury yields and, to a lesser extent, U.S. equity prices. On balance, U.S. fi- nancial conditions became more accommodative over the intermeeting period, with equity prices rising nota- bly. Despite signs of reduced risks to the outlook and of some stabilization in economic activity abroad, financial market participants’ views on the likely course of U.S. monetary policy appeared to have changed little over the intermeeting period. Market-based indicators continued to point to expectations that the target range for the fed- eral funds rate will be lowered by roughly 30 basis points this year. This was consistent with responses to the Open Market Desk’s survey, which continued to indi- cate that, while market participants viewed no change this year in the target range as the most likely outcome, they placed a higher probability on a reduction in the target range over the year than on an increase. Market commentary attributed the stability in federal funds rate expectations despite the perceived reduction in down- side risks partly to the Committee’s communications; some market participants reportedly regarded those communications as signaling a relatively high bar for changes to the target range. In addition, results from the Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Desk’s surveys suggested that, notwithstanding the abatement in some risks over recent months, many mar- ket participants continued to see risks to the economic outlook as skewed to the downside. The manager turned next to a review of money market developments and Desk operations. The federal funds rate was stable over the year-end date and remained close to the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate. On- going reserve management purchases of Treasury bills and the Desk’s repurchase agreement (repo) operations kept aggregate reserves above the level that prevailed in early September, contributing to relatively calm money market conditions around year-end. Market participants cited funding from the additional longer-term repo op- erations spanning year-end and increased capacity in daily operations as helping to maintain stable conditions in short-term funding markets. In addition, market par- ticipants prepared earlier than usual for year-end, with borrowers increasing their term borrowing from private lenders and lenders apparently expanding their lending capacity. Since year-end, money market rates remained stable, with the Desk’s longer-term repos maturing with no dis- cernible effect on market conditions and reserve man- agement purchases of Treasury bills proceeding smoothly. At the current pace of $60 billion per month, the staff’s estimates suggested that after April of this year, the Desk’s reserve management purchases will re- store the permanent base of reserves to levels above those prevailing in early September 2019. Although re- serves are projected to be above $1.5 trillion before April, a surge in the Treasury General Account balance during the April tax season is expected to briefly reduce reserve levels and, in the absence of repo operations, bring reserves down temporarily to around $1.5 trillion. The manager discussed a potential plan for gradually transitioning to an operational approach designed to maintain ample reserve levels without the active use of repo operations to supply reserves. Under this plan, repo operations would be maintained at least through April to ensure ample reserve conditions. However, the Desk would continue the gradual reduction and consol- idation of its repo offerings ahead of April, with the plan of phasing out term repo operations after April. As part of this transition, the minimum bid rate on repo opera- tions could be gradually lifted, and the Committee could consider whether there is a role for repo operations in the implementation framework. In the second quarter, the manager expected reserve conditions to support slowing the pace of Treasury bill purchases, with the goal of eventually aligning growth of the Federal Reserve’s Treasury holdings with trend growth in its liabilities. As that time approaches, the Committee might wish to consider the appropriate ma- turity composition of reserve management purchases of Treasury securities. The manager noted that, although the pace of Treasury purchases would likely continue into the second quarter, the rate of expansion in the Fed- eral Reserve’s balance sheet would moderate during the first half of 2020 as repo outstanding was gradually re- duced. The manager’s briefing addressed the possibility of a small technical adjustment to the Federal Reserve’s ad- ministered rates in light of the stability in money market conditions over recent months. With this adjustment, the Board would lift the interest rates on required and excess reserves by 5 basis points, and the FOMC would implement an equal-sized upward adjustment to the overnight reverse repurchase agreement offer rate. This technical adjustment would reverse the small downward adjustment to administered rates made in September, when money markets were volatile. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. No intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the System’s account during the intermeeting period. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available for the January 28–29 meeting indicated that labor market conditions remained strong and that real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a moderate rate in the fourth quarter of 2019. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption ex- penditures (PCE), remained below 2 percent in Novem- ber. Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation ex- pectations were little changed. Total nonfarm payroll employment rose in December, and the solid pace of job gains over the second half of 2019 was somewhat above that for the first half. How- ever, the rate of increase in payrolls in 2019 was slower than in 2018, whether or not one accounted for the an- ticipated effects of the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ bench- mark revision to payroll employment, which was sched- uled for early February. The unemployment rate held steady at its 50-year low of 3.5 percent in December, and the labor force participation rate and the employment- to-population ratio were unchanged as well. The unem- ployment rates for African Americans, Asians, Hispan- ics, and whites were below their levels at the end of the _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 28–29, 2020Page 11 previous economic expansion. Although persistent dif- ferentials between these rates remained, they have gen- erally narrowed during the expansion. The average share of workers employed part time for economic reasons in November stayed below its level in late 2007. The rate of private-sector job openings declined, on net, in Octo- ber and November but was still at a fairly high level; the rate of quits, which was also at a high level, edged up. The four-week moving average of initial claims for un- employment insurance benefits through mid-January re- mained near historically low levels. Nominal wage growth was moderate, with average hourly earnings for all employees increasing 2.9 percent over the 12 months ending in December. Total consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending in November. Core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) was 1.6 percent over that same 12-month period. Consumer food price inflation was lower than core inflation, and consumer energy prices declined. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas remained at 2 per- cent in November. The consumer price index (CPI) and the core CPI both rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in December. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed, on balance, in recent months. The University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers’ measure for the next 5 to 10 years moved back up in early January after having fallen to its lowest value on record in December. Mean- while, the 3-year-ahead measure from the Federal Re- serve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expec- tations remained near its historical low in December. Real PCE appeared to have risen more slowly in the fourth quarter than in the third quarter. Retail sales were soft during the fourth quarter, and sales of light motor vehicles declined in December after a strong gain in No- vember. However, key factors that influence consumer spending—including the low unemployment rate, the upward trend in real disposable income, high levels of households’ net worth, and generally low interest rates— remained supportive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. In addition, recent readings on consumer confidence from both the University of Michigan and the Conference Board surveys were strong. Real residential investment appeared to have increased solidly again in the fourth quarter. Starts for single-fam- ily homes increased sharply over the November and De- cember period, building permit issuance for such homes rose on net, and starts of multifamily units also moved up. Existing home sales increased, on balance, in No- vember and December, while new home sales declined. All told, the data on residential construction and sales continued to suggest that the decline in mortgage rates since late 2018 had been boosting housing activity. The available data pointed to another decline in real non- residential private fixed investment in the fourth quarter, with a further contraction in structures investment more than offsetting a modest rise in investment in equipment and intangibles. Nominal shipments and new orders of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft were little changed in the fourth quarter. Although some measures of business sentiment improved, analysts’ expectations of firms’ longer-term profit growth edged down further, concerns about trade developments continued to weigh on firms’ investment decisions, and reduced deliveries of the Boeing 737 Max were likely restraining investment. Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential struc- tures outside of the drilling and mining sector continued to decline in November. The total number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of busi- ness spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—was little changed, on net, through mid-January, though still below levels seen over the latter part of 2019. Industrial production (IP) increased, on net, in Novem- ber and December, partly because of a pickup in motor vehicle production following the strike at General Mo- tors. Even so, IP was lower than a year earlier, with de- clines in manufacturing production and the output of utilities only partly offset by an increase in mining out- put. Automakers’ schedules suggested that assemblies of light motor vehicles would increase in the first quar- ter, but that gain appeared likely to be offset by Boeing’s curtailed production of the 737 Max aircraft and, more generally, by mixed readings on new orders from na- tional and regional manufacturing surveys. Total real government purchases appeared to have in- creased moderately in the fourth quarter. Nominal de- fense spending in November and December pointed to only a moderate rise in real federal government pur- chases. Real purchases by state and local governments looked to have risen a little faster than in the third quar- ter; nominal construction spending by these govern- ments increased solidly in November, and state and local payrolls expanded modestly in December. Real net exports were estimated to have provided a sub- stantial boost to real GDP growth in the fourth quarter. Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Available monthly data suggested that imports fell sig- nificantly, led by declines in consumer goods and auto- mobiles, while exports were about flat. implied by overnight index swap quotes, moved down slightly, on net, and implied about a 30 basis point de- cline in the federal funds rate from its current level. Incoming data suggested that foreign economic growth slowed further in the fourth quarter to a very subdued pace. In the advanced foreign economies (AFEs), growth appeared to have remained weak as the manu- facturing slump continued and a consumption tax hike in Japan led to a sharp contraction in household spend- ing. In the emerging economies, social unrest weighed heavily on economic activity in Hong Kong and Chile, while the labor strike at General Motors was a further drag on Mexico’s already weak economy. In contrast, early GDP releases showed a pickup in growth in China and some other Asian economies, though news of the coronavirus outbreak raised questions about the sustain- ability of that pickup. Foreign inflation rose in the wake of temporary factors in India and China, while it re- mained soft in most AFEs, in part reflecting previous declines in energy prices and muted core inflation pres- sures. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investor sentiment improved, on balance, over the inter- meeting period, mostly reflecting progress related to the phase-one trade deal between the United States and China and its subsequent signing, the perception that the probability of a disorderly Brexit had declined, signs of stabilization in the global economic outlook, and, report- edly, continued confidence that monetary policy in the United States and other major economies would remain accommodative in the near term. Late in the period, concerns about the spread of the coronavirus and uncer- tainty about its potential economic effect weighed nega- tively on investor sentiment and led to moderate declines in the prices of risky assets. On net, equity prices in- creased notably over the intermeeting period, while cor- porate bond spreads were little changed and yields on nominal Treasury securities declined. Financing condi- tions for businesses and households eased a bit further and generally remained supportive of spending and eco- nomic activity. Federal Reserve communications over the intermeeting period reportedly reinforced investors’ beliefs that a near-term change to the target range for the federal funds rate was unlikely. Consistent with those reports, a straight read of the probability distributions for the fed- eral funds rate implied by options prices suggested that investors assigned a high probability to the target range remaining unchanged over the next few months. Expec- tations for the federal funds rate at the end of 2020, as Yields on nominal Treasury securities declined, on net, across the maturity spectrum over the intermeeting pe- riod, while the spread between the yields on nominal 10- and 2-year Treasury securities was little changed. Measures of inflation compensation over the next 5 years and 5 to 10 years ahead based on Treasury Infla- tion-Protected Securities decreased, on net, but re- mained above their October 2019 lows. Broad stock price indexes increased notably, on balance, over the intermeeting period, with gains largely at- tributed to improved market sentiment about trade ne- gotiations and a perceived lower probability of a disor- derly Brexit. Late in the period, equity prices retraced some of their gains, as concerns about the spread of the coronavirus weighed negatively on risk sentiment. Overall movements in stock prices varied widely across economic sectors, with stocks of firms in the infor- mation technology and utilities sectors significantly out- performing aggregate indexes, while stock prices of firms in the energy sector declined markedly. Option- implied volatility on the S&P 500 index increased a bit, on balance, while corporate credit spreads were little changed. Conditions in domestic short-term funding markets, in- cluding in secured financing, were stable over the inter- meeting period, even over year-end. Rates declined slightly, likely reflecting increased liquidity and a higher level of reserves provided by the Desk’s open market operations. The effective federal funds rate remained close to the IOER rate, and spreads for term unsecured commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit narrowed substantially, particularly after year-end. The Desk’s open market operations proceeded smoothly. For most of the intermeeting period, foreign equity prices rose amid progress on U.S.–China trade negotia- tions, generally favorable data on global economic activ- ity, and the reduced risk of a disorderly Brexit following the U.K. general election. Late in the period, however, concerns about the coronavirus outbreak in China weighed on risk sentiment. On balance, most major for- eign equity indexes increased modestly, and AFE long- term sovereign yields ended the period somewhat lower. U.K. and Canadian yields declined more than elsewhere against the backdrop of central bank communications that were interpreted as increasing the likelihood of pol- icy easing in those countries. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 28–29, 2020Page 13 The broad dollar index weakened slightly over the pe- riod, predominantly against emerging market currencies. The Chinese renminbi appreciated notably against the dollar on positive trade policy developments, but this gain was more than undone late in the period by con- cerns about the coronavirus. The Mexican peso strengthened against the dollar, supported by progress on the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) and Bank of Mexico communications that were perceived as less accommodative than expected. Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms remained accommodative, on balance, with corporate borrowing costs staying near historical lows during the intermeeting period. Gross issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds was subdued in January and December after surg- ing in November. Issuance of speculative-grade bonds over the intermeeting period remained about in line with the average pace over December and January in recent years. Institutional leveraged loan issuance continued to be robust in December, reflecting solid refinancing ac- tivity and moderate new money issuance. Meanwhile, commercial and industrial (C&I) loans on banks’ balance sheets contracted in the fourth quarter. Respondents to the January 2020 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) reported that bor- rower demand weakened for C&I loans over the fourth quarter, and lending standards on such loans were little changed. Gross equity issuance through seasoned offer- ings remained robust in December, while initial public offerings continued to be quite light. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations and the earnings outlook remained generally stable in recent months. Credit con- ditions for both small businesses and municipalities re- mained accommodative on net. In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing conditions also remained generally accommodative. The volume of agency and non-agency commercial mort- gage-backed securities issuance grew notably in the fourth quarter, buoyed by lower interest rates, and the growth of CRE loans on banks’ books picked up over this period. Responses to the January 2020 SLOOS sug- gested that lending standards and demand for most CRE loan categories were unchanged in the fourth quarter. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative on balance. Mortgage rates decreased notably during the intermeeting period, reach- ing recent-year lows. Home-purchase originations re- mained around post-crisis highs, and mortgage refinanc- ing activity continued at a strong pace through Decem- ber. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re- mained supportive of growth in consumer spending, al- though the supply of credit remained relatively tight for nonprime borrowers. The growth of credit card bal- ances slowed in the fourth quarter, and, according to the January SLOOS, commercial banks tightened their standards on credit card loans over this period. Auto loan growth maintained a solid pace in recent months amid declining interest rates through year-end. The staff provided an update on its assessments of po- tential risks to financial stability. On balance, the finan- cial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system were char- acterized as moderate. The staff judged that asset valu- ation pressures had increased in recent months to an el- evated level. Asset valuation pressures were character- ized as fairly widespread across a number of markets, similar to the situation in much of 2017 and 2018. In assessing vulnerabilities stemming from borrowing in the household and business sectors, the staff noted that, while the ratio of household debt to nominal GDP was fairly low, the ratio of business debt to nominal GDP was high by historical standards. At the same time, ma- jor financial institutions were viewed as resilient, in part because of high levels of capital at banks. Nonetheless, the staff noted that banks had announced that they in- tend to allow their capital ratios to decline closer to reg- ulatory requirements over the medium term. Vulnera- bilities stemming from funding risk were characterized as moderate. While the money market strains in Sep- tember raised some questions about vulnerabilities in funding markets, the staff assessed that the core of the financial system remains resilient to vulnerabilities from maturity and liquidity transformation. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. real GDP growth prepared by the staff for the January FOMC meeting was stronger than in the previous forecast. Data pertaining to the fourth quarter of 2019, particularly on imports, sug- gested output rose faster at the end of the year than was previously projected, and this faster pace seemed con- sistent with the solid employment gains in the fourth quarter. In addition, more supportive financial condi- tions and the anticipated effects of the phase-one trade deal between the United States and China pushed up the staff’s GDP forecast for this year and next. All told, real GDP growth was projected to be about the same in 2020 as in 2019 and then to slow modestly in the coming years, partly because of a fading boost from fiscal policy. Output was forecast to expand at a rate a little above the staff’s estimate of its potential rate of growth in 2020 and 2021 and then to slow to a pace slightly below potential Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ output growth in 2022. The unemployment rate was projected to decline a little further this year and to re- main at that lower level through 2022; the unemploy- ment rate was anticipated to be below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate throughout the forecast pe- riod. The staff’s forecasts for both total and core PCE price inflation over the 2020–22 period were essentially unre- vised. Core inflation was still projected to step up a little in 2020 but to run a bit below 2 percent both this year and over the next two years. Total PCE price inflation was projected to be a little lower than core inflation in 2020 because of a projected decline in consumer energy prices and to be the same as core inflation in 2021 and 2022. The staff continued to view the uncertainty around its projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as generally similar to the average of the past 20 years. The staff viewed the downside risks to economic activity as having diminished a bit further since the previous forecast but still judged that the risks to the forecast for real GDP growth were tilted to the downside, with a corresponding skew to the upside for the unemployment rate. Important factors influencing this assessment were that foreign economic and geopo- litical developments still seemed more likely to move in directions that could have significant negative effects on the U.S. economy than to resolve more favorably than assumed. In addition, softness in business investment and manufacturing production last year, as well as the recent weakness in imports, was seen as pointing to the possibility of a more substantial slowing in economic growth than the staff projected. The risks to the infla- tion projection were also viewed as having a downward skew, in part because of the downside risks to the fore- cast for economic activity. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants agreed that the labor market had remained strong over the intermeeting period and that economic activity had risen at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate had remained low. Although household spending had risen at a moderate pace, business fixed investment and exports had remained weak. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 per- cent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low; survey-based measures of longer-term in- flation expectations were little changed. Participants generally judged that the current stance of monetary policy was appropriate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. They expected economic growth to continue at a moderate pace, supported by ac- commodative monetary and financial conditions. In ad- dition, some trade uncertainties had diminished recently, and there were some signs of stabilization in global growth. Nonetheless, uncertainties about the outlook remained, including those posed by the outbreak of the coronavirus. In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that spending growth had moderated in the fourth quarter. However, they generally expected that, in the period ahead, consumption spending would likely re- main on a firm footing, supported by strong labor mar- ket conditions, rising incomes, and healthy household balance sheets. Some participants noted the upbeat tone of consumer surveys, and a few commented that their District contacts had reported solid retail sales during the holiday shopping season. In addition, many partici- pants were encouraged by the significant pickup since last summer in residential investment, a development that reflected, in part, the effects of lower mortgage rates. With respect to the business sector, participants ob- served that business investment and exports remained weak and that manufacturing output had declined over the past year. Looking ahead, participants were generally cautiously optimistic about the effects on the business sector of the recent favorable trade developments and the signs of stabilization in global growth. Many partic- ipants expressed the view that these developments might boost business confidence or raise export demand, which would help strengthen or at least stabilize business investment. A few participants remarked that contacts in their Districts had noted that business sentiment was brighter or that companies were intending to expand their capital expenditures this year. Several other partic- ipants, however, judged that the effect of the recent trade agreement with China would be relatively limited, as trade uncertainty would likely remain elevated, with the possibility remaining of the emergence of new ten- sions as well as the reescalation of existing tensions. They noted that the agreement would still leave a large portion of tariffs in place and that many firms had al- ready been making production and supply chain adjust- ments in response to trade tensions. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 28–29, 2020Page 15 Participants also commented on ongoing challenges fac- ing the energy and agriculture sectors. A couple of par- ticipants remarked that activity in the energy sector con- tinued to be weak, and a few noted that financial condi- tions in the agricultural sector would likely remain chal- lenging for many despite farm subsidies from the federal government and recent optimism surrounding trade prospects. Participants judged that conditions in the labor market remained strong, with the unemployment rate at a 50-year low and continued solid job gains, on average. Although the upcoming annual benchmark revision was expected to reduce estimates of recent payroll growth, participants expected payroll employment to expand at a healthy pace this year. Business contacts in many Dis- tricts indicated continued strong labor demand, with several participants mentioning that contacts reported difficulties in finding qualified workers or that observed wage growth might currently understate the degree of tightness in the labor market. However, a number of participants indicated that aggregate measures of nomi- nal wages continued to rise at a moderate pace broadly in line with productivity growth and the rate of inflation. Several participants commented on potential reasons for the absence of stronger broad-based wage pressures, in- cluding technological changes that could substitute for labor, increased willingness of employees to forgo wage gains for greater job stability, adjustments in nonwage portions of compensation packages, and the possibility that the labor market was not as tight as the historically low unemployment rate would suggest. Many partici- pants pointed to the strong performance of labor force participation despite the downward pressures associated with an aging population, and several raised the possibil- ity that there was some room for labor force participa- tion to rise further. In their discussion of inflation developments, partici- pants noted that recent readings on overall and core PCE price inflation, measured on a 12-month basis, had continued to run below 2 percent. Overall, participants described their inflation outlook as having changed little since December. Participants generally expected infla- tion to move closer to 2 percent in the coming months as the unusually low readings in early 2019 drop out of the 12-month calculation. Participants also expected that, as the economic expansion continues and resource utilization remains high, inflation would return to the 2 percent objective on a sustainable basis. A few partic- ipants expressed less confidence in this outlook for in- flation and commented that inflation had averaged less than 2 percent over the past several years even as re- source utilization had increased, or pointed to down- ward pressures from global or technology-related factors that could continue to suppress inflation. A couple of participants, however, noted that some alternative infla- tion indicators, including trimmed mean measures, sug- gested that there had been a modest step-up in underly- ing inflation during 2019 or that underlying inflation could already be at a level consistent with the Commit- tee’s goal. Participants generally saw the distribution of risks to the outlook for economic activity as somewhat more favor- able than at the previous meeting, although a number of downside risks remained prominent. The easing of trade tensions resulting from the recent agreement with China and the passage of the USMCA as well as tentative signs of stabilization in global economic growth helped reduce downside risks and appeared to buoy business senti- ment. The risk of a “hard” Brexit had appeared to re- cede further. In addition, statistical models designed to estimate the probability of recession using financial mar- ket data suggested that the likelihood of a recession oc- curring over the next year had fallen notably in recent months. Still, participants generally expected trade-re- lated uncertainty to remain somewhat elevated, and they were mindful of the possibility that the tentative signs of stabilization in global growth could fade. Geopolitical risks, especially in connection with the Middle East, re- mained. The threat of the coronavirus, in addition to its human toll, had emerged as a new risk to the global growth outlook, which participants agreed warranted close watching. In their discussion of financial stability, participants acknowledged the staff report suggesting that overall fi- nancial vulnerabilities remained moderate and that the financial system remained resilient. Nonetheless, several participants observed that equity, corporate debt, and CRE valuations were elevated and drew attention to high levels of corporate indebtedness and weak underwriting standards in leveraged loan markets. Some participants expressed the concern that financial imbalances—in- cluding overvaluation and excessive indebtedness— could amplify an adverse shock to the economy, that the current conditions of low interest rates and labor market tightness could increase risks to financial stability, or that cyber attacks could affect the U.S. financial system. Sev- eral participants noted that planned increases in dividend payouts by large banks and the associated decline in cap- ital buffers might leave those banks with less capacity to weather adverse shocks—which could have negative im- plications for the economy—or that lower bank capital Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ ratios could be associated with greater tail risks to GDP growth. On the other hand, capital levels at U.S. banks were quite high relative to other sectors of the financial system, raising questions about the potential migration of lending activities away from the U.S. banking sector to areas outside the oversight of federal banking super- visors. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants judged that it would be appropriate to main- tain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation re- turning to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec- tive. With regard to monetary policy beyond this meet- ing, participants viewed the current stance of policy as likely to remain appropriate for a time, provided that in- coming information about the economy remained broadly consistent with this economic outlook. Of course, if developments emerged that led to a material reassessment of the outlook, an adjustment to the stance of monetary policy would be appropriate, in order to foster achievement of the Committee’s dual-mandate objectives. In commenting on the monetary policy outlook, partici- pants concurred that maintaining the current stance of policy would give the Committee time for a fuller assess- ment of the ongoing effects on economic activity of last year’s shift to a more accommodative policy stance and would also allow policymakers to accumulate further in- formation bearing on the economic outlook. Partici- pants discussed how maintaining the current policy stance for a time could be helpful in supporting U.S. eco- nomic activity and employment in the face of global de- velopments that have been weighing on spending deci- sions. With regard to the Committee’s price-stability objective, participants observed that the current degree of mone- tary policy accommodation would be useful in facilitat- ing a return of inflation to 2 percent. Several participants noted that inflation returning to 2 percent would help ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remained consistent with the Committee’s longer-run inflation ob- jective. A few participants stressed that the Committee should be more explicit about the need to achieve its in- flation goal on a sustained basis. Several participants suggested that inflation modestly exceeding 2 percent for a period would be consistent with the achievement of the Committee’s longer-run inflation objective and that such mild overshooting might underscore the sym- metry of that objective. With regard to the Committee’s maximum employment objective, a few participants ob- served that the actual level of employment might still be below maximum employment and that maintaining the present monetary policy stance would allow the econ- omy to achieve that maximum level. A couple of other participants expressed concern that tight labor markets have in the past been associated with economic and fi- nancial imbalances and that the emergence of such im- balances might jeopardize the longer-run attainment of the Committee’s dual-mandate goals. Participants discussed the open market operations that the Federal Reserve had undertaken since September to implement monetary policy, as well as forthcoming op- erational measures. Participants agreed that the opera- tions undertaken by the Desk since mid-September had been effective in helping to stabilize conditions in money markets and that implementation of the plan that the Committee announced in October to purchase Treasury bills and conduct repo operations had proceeded smoothly. Participants observed that enactment of this plan had succeeded in replenishing reserve balances to levels at or above those prevailing in early September 2019 and in ensuring continued control of the federal funds rate. Many participants stressed that, as reserves approached durably ample levels, the need for sizable Treasury bill purchases and repo operations would di- minish and that such operations could be gradually scaled back or phased out. Beyond that point, regular open market operations would be required over time in order to accommodate the trend growth in the Federal Reserve’s liabilities and maintain an ample level of re- serves. Participants who commented on the Desk’s pro- posal for the transition to the ample-reserves regime in- dicated that they were comfortable with that proposal. They remarked that the details of the Committee’s plans would be adjusted as appropriate to support effective implementation of monetary policy. Participants noted that it would be important to continue to communicate to the public that open market operations now and in the period ahead were technical operations aimed at achieving and maintaining ample reserves and that any adjustments to those operations were not intended to represent a change in the stance of monetary policy. Several participants suggested that the Committee should resume before long its discussion of the role that repo operations might play in an ample-reserves regime, including the possible creation of a standing repo facility. A couple of these participants cited the potential for such a facility to reduce the banking system’s demand for reserves over the longer term. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 28–29, 2020Page 17 Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members noted that information received since the FOMC met in December indicated that the labor market remained strong and that economic activity had been ris- ing at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on av- erage, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Although household spending had been rising at a moderate pace, business fixed investment and exports remained weak. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and en- ergy were running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low; sur- vey-based measures of longer-term inflation expecta- tions were little changed. Members agreed to maintain the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent. Members judged that the current stance of monetary policy was appropri- ate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. Members also agreed that, in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the fed- eral funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent infla- tion objective. And they concurred that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. With regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed that incoming data warranted a change in the statement’s description of recent rises in household spending from “strong” to “moderate.” They also agreed to describe the current monetary policy stance as consistent with inflation “returning to,” rather than be- ing “near,” their symmetric 2 percent longer-run objec- tive. In commenting on this change in wording, a few members noted that the new language would make the postmeeting statement more consistent with the Com- mittee’s outlook or might usefully affirm the symmetry of the Committee’s inflation goal and indicate that poli- cymakers were not satisfied with inflation outcomes that were persistently below 2 percent. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective January 30, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1½ to 1¾ percent. In light of recent and expected increases in the Federal Reserve’s non-reserve liabilities, the Committee directs the Desk to continue purchasing Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of 2020 to maintain over time ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early Sep- tember 2019. The Committee also directs the Desk to continue conducting term and over- night repurchase agreement operations at least through April 2020 to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of sharp increases in non-reserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementa- tion. In addition, the Committee directs the Desk to conduct overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 1.50 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per- counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treas- ury securities and to continue reinvesting all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities received during each calendar month. Principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in Treasury securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities outstanding; principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in agency mortgage-backed securities. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Page 18Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Although household spending has been rising at a moderate pace, business fixed investment and exports remain weak. On a 12‑month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are run- ning below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey- based measures of longer-term inflation expec- tations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employ- ment and price stability. The Committee de- cided to maintain the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent. The Com- mittee judges that the current stance of mone- tary policy is appropriate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec- tive. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including global devel- opments and muted inflation pressures, as it as- sesses the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. In determining the timing and size of future ad- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pres- sures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to raise the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances to 1.60 percent. Setting the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances 10 basis points above the bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate is intended to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the FOMC’s target range. The Board of Governors also voted unanimously to approve estab- lishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 2.25 percent, effective January 30, 2020. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, March 17–18, 2020. The meeting adjourned at 9:50 a.m. on January 29, 2020. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on January 2, 2020, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 10–11, 2019. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 28–29, 2020Page 19 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee March 15, 2020 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconfer- ence on Sunday, March 15, 2020, at 10:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Patrick Harker Robert S. Kaplan Neel Kashkari Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, and Charles L. Evans, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Brian M. Doyle, Wendy E. Dunn, and Ellen E. Meade, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Andrew Figura and John M. Roberts, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Rebecca Zarutskie, Assistant Director, Division of Shaghil Ahmed, Michael Dotsey, Joseph W. Gruber, Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Beverly Hirtle, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, and Ellis W. Tallman, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner, Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. Brett Berger, Adviser, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board of Governors Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Ellen J. Bromagen and Ron Feldman, First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Minneapolis, respectively Kartik B. Athreya, Anna Paulson, Daleep Singh, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Chicago, New York, and St. Louis, respectively Paula Tkac, Robert G. Valletta, and Nathaniel Wuerffel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, San Francisco, and New York, respectively George A. Kahn, Matthew D. Raskin, and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, New York, and New York, respectively Karel Mertens, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The System Open Market Account (SOMA) manager first reviewed developments in domestic and global fi- nancial markets. Financial markets remained exception- ally volatile amid the global spread of the coronavirus and uncertainty regarding its effects. Since the meeting of the FOMC in late January, the S&P 500 index de- clined 18 percent, nominal U.S. Treasury yields moved 60 to 100 basis points lower, and market-based measures of inflation compensation fell 75 to 100 basis points. Investment-grade and high-yield credit spreads widened about 120 basis points and 360 basis points, respectively. The U.S. dollar appreciated notably against most curren- cies, with the exception of other safe-haven currencies, and crude oil prices dropped 40 percent. Against this backdrop, expectations for the path of the federal funds rate adjusted sharply. Implied rates on federal funds fu- tures contracts suggested the Committee was expected to reduce the target range 1 full percentage point at its upcoming scheduled meeting following the 50 basis point reduction in the target range in early March. In addition, market participants reportedly anticipated that the Committee would announce additional purchases of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securi- ties (MBS). Trading conditions across a range of markets were se- verely strained. In corporate bond markets, trading ac- tivity and liquidity were at very low levels, although not back to the low point reached in 2008. Market partici- pants expected that actions taken to slow the spread of the virus could have significant effects on the credit wor- thiness of certain borrowers, particularly those at the lower end of the credit spectrum. Market participants also increasingly pointed to concerns in other segments of the debt market. In securitized markets, including those for asset-backed securities (ABS) and commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), primary market is- suance slowed, and secondary market trading had be- come less orderly, with money managers selling short- dated liquid products to meet investor redemptions. In the Treasury market, following several consecutive days of deteriorating conditions, market participants re- ported an acute decline in market liquidity. A number of primary dealers found it especially difficult to make markets in off-the-run Treasury securities and reported that this segment of the market had ceased to function effectively. This disruption in intermediation was at- tributed, in part, to sales of off-the-run Treasury securi- ties and flight-to-quality flows into the most liquid, on-the-run Treasury securities. Conditions in short-term funding markets also deterio- rated sharply amid a decline in market liquidity and chal- lenges in dealer intermediation. Over recent days, the premium paid to obtain dollars through the foreign ex- change swap market increased sharply, and the volumes in term repurchase agreement (repo) markets dropped significantly. Issuance of commercial paper (CP) matur- ing beyond one week reportedly almost dried up at the end of the week before the meeting, and primary- and secondary-market liquidity for financial and nonfinancial CP was described as nearly nonexistent at a time when investor concern about issuer credit risk was rising. The manager then summarized actions taken by the Desk to address some of the strains in financial markets. Repo lending operations were greatly expanded to ad- dress the acute worsening in term funding markets; these operations included the addition of large-scale one- and three-month term repo operations. Despite the sizable offering of additional term repo, take-up was well below the offered amounts, and there was little improvement in Treasury market functioning. As a result, the Chair, in consultation with the FOMC, instructed the Desk to conduct purchases of Treasury securities across a range of maturities. The Desk also revised the schedule of Treasury purchases, announcing that $37 billion of the monthly scheduled purchases would be completed on Friday, March 13. These purchases were conducted across the curve. Market participants suggested that the Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ operations had been helpful in addressing some funding pressures, but trading conditions in Treasury, mortgage, and credit markets remained severely strained. The SOMA manager noted that, if the FOMC directed the Desk to conduct additional purchases of MBS and Treasury securities, the Desk could initially conduct such purchases at a more rapid pace to more quickly address liquidity strains. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. No intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the System’s account during the intermeeting period. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The coronavirus outbreak was disrupting economic ac- tivity in many countries, including the United States, by the time of the March 15 meeting. There were limited available U.S. economic data, however, that covered the period since the intensification of concerns about the domestic effects of the outbreak. Information that pre- dated that period indicated that labor market conditions had remained strong through February and that real gross domestic product (GDP) appeared to have been increasing at a moderate pace in the first two months of the year. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for per- sonal consumption expenditures (PCE), remained below 2 percent in January. Survey-based measures of longer- run inflation expectations were little changed. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded strongly in January and February, and the unemployment rate was at its 50-year low of 3.5 percent in February. Meanwhile, the labor force participation rate and the employment- to-population ratio edged up on net. Initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits—a timely indicator of a deterioration in labor market conditions—remained near historically low levels through early March, which was still before economic shutdowns started to take place in the United States. Nominal wage growth was moderate on balance. Average hourly earnings for all employees increased 3 percent over the 12 months end- ing in February. The employment cost index for private- sector workers increased 2.7 percent over the 12 months ending in December, while total labor compensation per hour in the business sector—a highly volatile measure of wage gains—rose 3.6 percent over the four quarters of last year. Total consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price index, increased 1.7 percent over the 12 months ending in January. Core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) was 1.6 percent over that same 12-month period. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price infla- tion constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 2.1 percent in January. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in February, and the core CPI increased 2.4 percent over that same period. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed, on balance, in recent months. The Survey of Professional Forecasters measure for the next 10 years was unchanged in the first quarter, as was the longer-run measure from the Blue Chip survey in March. The Uni- versity of Michigan Surveys of Consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years edged down in February and re- mained in the lower part of its prevailing range in early March. The three-year-ahead measure from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Ex- pectations edged up in February and remained in its re- cent range. Real PCE growth was moderate in January. The com- ponents of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate PCE edged down in February, and the pace of sales of light motor vehicles in January and February was above its fourth-quarter average. However, the consumer sen- timent measure from the Michigan survey started to de- cline notably in early March, and other daily and weekly sentiment measures—such as the Bloomberg Consumer Comfort Index, the Morning Consult confidence index, and the Rasmussen Consumer Index—were also deteri- orating. Both starts and building permit issuance for single- family homes increased in January over their fourth- quarter averages, and starts of multifamily units also moved up. New and existing home sales in January were both above their average fourth-quarter levels. Nominal shipments and new orders of nondefense cap- ital goods excluding aircraft increased solidly in January, although the anticipated resumption of deliveries of the Boeing 737 Max was delayed until later in the year. Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential struc- tures outside of the drilling and mining sector increased in January. The total number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—was edging up through mid-March and was not yet showing any of the expected falloff from the recent sharp declines in crude oil prices. The available data suggested that manufacturing produc- tion moved up in February after edging down in January, leaving the level of factory output little changed, on net, Minutes of the Meeting of March 15, 2020Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ over the past 12 months. Although output in the mining sector—which includes crude oil extraction—had in- creased in January, available data indicated that output in this sector would decrease in February; the recent sharp declines in crude oil prices pointed to a reduction in min- ing-sector production over at least the near term. Total real government purchases appeared to be increas- ing moderately. Federal defense spending rose in Janu- ary and February, and federal employment was boosted by hiring for the 2020 census. State and local govern- ment payrolls expanded strongly in January and Febru- ary, and nominal construction spending by these govern- ments increased solidly in January. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in January, as a steep fall in imports more than offset a de- cline in exports. The fall in imports, which followed a sizable fourth-quarter decline, was led by lower imports of industrial supplies, automotive products, and capital goods. The decline in exports was driven by lower ex- ports of capital goods and industrial supplies. Available indicators suggested that both exports and imports likely declined in February, in part reflecting disruptions re- lated to the coronavirus outbreak. The pace of economic growth abroad was already sub- dued before the outbreak. In the advanced foreign economies (AFEs), real GDP growth had slowed sharply at the end of 2019, and indicators pointed to only a modest pickup in economic growth early this year. In the emerging market economies (EMEs), incoming data had been more positive, as indicators for high-tech and manufacturing production in Asian economies outside of China were upbeat, and the effects of social protests in Chile and Hong Kong, along with the effects of the General Motors strike on Mexican economic activity, had faded. By early February, however, the coronavirus outbreak in China brought economic activity in many parts of the country to a standstill. Hubei province, the epicenter of the outbreak and a manufacturing hub, was put under quarantine, and factories across the country were shut down. Foreign economic indicators for the more recent period, following the spread of the virus to the rest of the world, were generally not yet available. However, widespread shutdowns together with lower commodity prices and tighter financial conditions sug- gested that activity was weakening sharply in most for- eign economies. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Concerns about the coronavirus outbreak dominated fi- nancial market developments at home and abroad over the intermeeting period. Equity prices, sovereign yields, and the market-implied expected trajectory of the federal funds rate all plummeted, and the volatility of asset prices soared. Late in the intermeeting period, short- term funding markets showed signs of stress, with ele- vated demand for repo funding and increased short-term spreads. Trading conditions for Treasury securities and MBS were impaired. Moreover, primary issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds was sporadic, and that of speculative-grade corporate bonds and leveraged loans virtually stopped after late February. Data from before the escalation of coronavirus concerns in late February suggested that financial conditions for nonfi- nancial businesses and for households had generally re- mained supportive of economic activity and spending, but developments late in the intermeeting period pointed to tightening credit conditions. Expectations for the path of the federal funds rate de- clined sharply over the intermeeting period. Toward the end of the period, a straight read of overnight index swap (OIS) quotes suggested that the federal funds rate would remain below 25 basis points at least until the middle of 2021. After the 50 basis point decrease in the target range on March 3, prices of federal funds futures options suggested that investors assigned a significant probability to the target range decreasing to 0 to 25 basis points at or before the scheduled March meeting. Yields on nominal Treasury securities plummeted across the maturity spectrum, with the 10- and 30-year yields reaching all-time lows at some point. A staff term struc- ture model largely attributed the decline in the 10-year yield to lower expected future short-term rates. Measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities fell sharply and reached a historical low at the 5-to-10-year horizon late in the in- termeeting period. Uncertainty regarding future interest rates increased sharply over the intermeeting period. At one point, the one-month-ahead swaption-implied volatility of the 10-year swap rate surpassed its highest level seen during the “taper tantrum” episode in mid-2013. Treasury mar- ket functioning was severely impaired late in the inter- meeting period, with some dealers reportedly unwilling to make markets for clients and the normal linkage be- tween cash and futures markets broken. Market depth was extremely thin, and bid-ask spreads widened sharply. Broad stock price indexes plummeted because of a flight to safety amid escalating concerns about global eco- nomic activity. Although the declines were broad based, the airline, energy, and bank sectors were among the worst performers. Stock price indexes were extremely Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ volatile, and the one-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index soared, sometimes reaching levels not seen since the fall of 2008. Corporate bond spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury yields widened sig- nificantly, and spreads on speculative-grade energy bonds widened especially sharply amid plunging oil prices. The 50 basis point decrease in the target range for the federal funds rate announced on March 3 passed through fully to overnight unsecured and secured rates. Conditions in domestic short-term funding markets showed signs of funding strains late in the intermeeting period. The rates on unsecured CP and negotiable cer- tificates of deposit with maturities exceeding one month increased sharply relative to OIS rates, with pronounced effects for issuers in the energy and transportation sec- tors. Overnight and term repo rates were elevated late in the intermeeting period, and the take-up of the Fed- eral Reserve’s repo operations increased substantially for both overnight and term operations. Over the intermeeting period, foreign risk asset prices plummeted amid a rapid deterioration of investor senti- ment due to the global spread of the coronavirus. Major foreign equity indexes dropped sharply over the inter- meeting period, while option-implied volatility measures climbed to their highest levels since the Global Financial Crisis. EME fund outflows accelerated late in the period as emerging market bond spreads widened notably. Most AFE long-term sovereign yields ended the period notably lower. Inflation compensation in the euro area reached new lows. In response to the economic effect of the virus, several central banks cut policy rates and injected liquidity. The broad dollar index strengthened notably over the period, boosted by safe-haven demand, predominantly against EME currencies, and despite a significant decline in U.S. yields. Safe-haven demand also bolstered the Japanese yen and Swiss franc. Policy actions by Chinese authorities supported the Chinese renminbi, which de- preciated about 1.5 percent against the dollar on net. Other EME currencies, such as the Brazilian real and Mexican peso, depreciated sharply, as market partici- pants viewed them as particularly vulnerable to a global economic slowdown and declining commodity prices. Oil prices declined over 40 percent on expectations of lower demand due to the virus outbreak and an unex- pected price cut by Saudi Arabia amid a breakdown of negotiations between OPEC and Russia to reduce pro- duction levels. Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms were strained over the late part of the intermeeting period. After robust issuance earlier in the first quarter, corpo- rate bond issuance came to a near standstill around late February in the midst of elevated volatility following the escalation of concerns about the coronavirus outbreak. Later in the intermeeting period, investment-grade bond issuance resumed intermittently, but speculative-grade issuance and leveraged loan issuance virtually stopped. In addition, some firms reportedly postponed plans to go public. Commercial and industrial loan growth was modest. Credit quality indicators for nonfinancial cor- porations had been solid earlier in the quarter but dete- riorated following the escalation of the coronavirus out- break, particularly for the speculative-grade and energy segments of the market. Measures of the year-ahead ex- pected default rate increased in March to levels slightly under those observed during the oil price plunge in early 2016, reflecting higher expected default rates among speculative-grade firms as well as energy firms. In addi- tion, the outlook for corporate earnings deteriorated somewhat, as equity analysts revised down their earnings per share estimates a notch, and several firms warned that the coronavirus outbreak could hurt their earnings and make them difficult to predict. The supply of credit to small businesses over the fourth quarter of last year had remained relatively accommodative, but loan origi- nations ticked down in January, consistent with ongoing reports of weak loan demand. Market turmoil spilled into municipal bond markets late in the intermeeting period, as spreads widened substan- tially and some borrowers became hesitant to come to the market. Credit conditions in the municipal market had been accommodative over the early part of the in- termeeting period, and issuance volumes in late February were reportedly boosted by strong investor demand for low-risk assets. Financing conditions in the commercial real estate (CRE) sector worsened late in the intermeeting period, as issuance of CMBS slowed and spreads widened nota- bly to around levels seen in 2016. Data from before the escalation of concerns over the coronavirus outbreak pointed to accommodative financing conditions. CRE loan growth at banks remained solid through February and CRE debt outstanding increased modestly through mid-February, according to available data. The primary mortgage rate increased sharply toward the end of the period as MBS market liquidity deteriorated, after falling substantially in February and early March. Capacity constraints at mortgage originators reportedly Minutes of the Meeting of March 15, 2020Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ intensified, while borrower interest in refinancing in- creased significantly from already elevated levels. More- over, additional constraints emerged as it became more difficult to conduct operations that usually happen face- to-face. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets wors- ened late in the intermeeting period. Strains began ap- pearing in consumer ABS markets, although less so than in other fixed-income markets. In March, consumer ABS spreads widened sharply, liquidity deteriorated, and new issuance became sporadic. Lenders in consumer credit markets began developing programs to assist bor- rowers whose finances were affected by the outbreak. Earlier in the intermeeting period, financing conditions had been generally supportive of growth. Credit card balances and auto loan balances both appeared to grow solidly through February, according to banks’ data, con- tinuing their growth in the fourth quarter. Conditions for subprime credit card borrowers remained relatively tight but showed some signs of easing. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for the U.S. economy prepared by the staff for the March FOMC meeting was downgraded sig- nificantly from the January meeting forecast in response to news on the spread of the coronavirus at home and abroad and in response to a related substantial mark- down of the staff’s foreign economic outlook, along with recent financial market movements. Real GDP was forecast to decline and the unemployment rate to rise, on net, in the first half of this year. Given the downside risks and the elevated uncertainty about how much the economy would weaken and how long it would take to recover, the staff provided two plausible economic sce- narios that spanned a range of possibilities. Importantly, the future performance of the economy would depend on the evolution of the virus outbreak and the measures undertaken to contain it. In one scenario, economic ac- tivity started to rebound in the second half of this year. In a more adverse scenario, the economy entered reces- sion this year, with a recovery much slower to take hold and not materially under way until next year. In both scenarios, inflation was projected to weaken, reflecting both the deterioration in resource utilization and sizable expected declines in consumer energy prices. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants noted that the coronavirus outbreak was harming communities and disrupting economic activity in many countries, including the United States, and that global financial conditions had also been significantly af- fected. Participants expressed their deep concern for those whose health had been harmed and observed that the matter was, above all, a public health emergency. They commented that the measures—such as social dis- tancing—taken in response to the pandemic, while needed to contain the outbreak, would nevertheless take a toll on U.S. economic activity in the near term. Participants noted that available economic data showed that the U.S. economy came into this challenging period on a strong footing. Information received since the Committee met in January indicated that the labor mar- ket remained strong through February and that eco- nomic activity rose at a moderate rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate had remained low. Although household spending had risen at a moderate pace, business fixed investment and exports had remained weak; further- more, in recent weeks the energy sector had come under stress due to the sharp drop in oil prices. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy had been running below 2 percent. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expecta- tions had been little changed. However, market-based measures of inflation compensation had declined. All participants viewed the near-term U.S. economic outlook as having deteriorated sharply in recent weeks and as having become profoundly uncertain. Many par- ticipants had repeatedly downgraded their outlook of late in response to the rapidly evolving situation. All saw U.S. economic activity as likely to decline in the coming quarter and viewed downside risks to the economic out- look as having increased significantly. Participants noted that the timing of the resumption of growth in the U.S. economy depended on the containment measures put in place, as well as the success of those measures, and on the responses of other policies, including fiscal policy. With regard to households’ behavior, participants noted that, although consumption spending had been a key driver of growth in economic activity through the first two months of this year, the pandemic was starting to impair consumer confidence and to exert an adverse ef- fect on household balance sheets. Participants reported that wide-ranging social-distancing measures were in op- eration or in prospect in their Districts. These measures—which included temporary closures of some physical locations, such as stores and restaurants, in which consumers purchased goods and services—would have the effect of reducing in-person transactions by households. Online shopping could substitute for some Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ of this activity but was unlikely to replace it fully. The housing market was likely to be disrupted by social dis- tancing, by financial uncertainty—including difficulties that households and businesses would face in meeting mortgage or rental payments—and by volatility in the market for MBS. Participants stressed the major down- side risk that the spread of the virus might intensify in those areas of the country currently less affected, thereby sidelining many more U.S. workers and further damping purchases by consumers. Participants expressed con- cern that households with low incomes had less of a sav- ings buffer with which to meet expenses during the in- terruption to economic activity. This situation made those households more vulnerable to a downturn in the economy and tended to magnify the reduction in aggre- gate demand associated with the nation’s response to the pandemic. Participants relayed reports on business sectors already badly hit by the response to the coronavirus outbreak. These sectors included those affected by the cancellation of many events, decisions by firms and households to reduce travel, government-mandated reductions in entry from abroad, and cutbacks on economic activity that re- quired in-person interaction. Firms directly affected in- cluded those connected to air travel, cruise lines, hotels, tourism services, sports and recreation, entertainment, hospitality, and restaurants. In the past week, pullbacks in purchases at retail stores, except for emergency buy- ing, had reportedly intensified significantly. In addition, the energy sector had come under stress because of re- cent large declines in oil prices. Many U.S. businesses had moved to telework arrangements; other businesses, however, could not readily shift to telework status or had limited telework technology. Participants observed that the coronavirus outbreak had inevitably hurt business confidence and that the expected length and severity of the restrictions on economic activity that involved in- person interaction would importantly affect the size of the response of investment spending to the situation. Participants expressed concern about the financial strain that many U.S. firms were under because of the loss of business and the extraordinary turbulence in financial markets. With regard to supply chains, many contacts had reported that some linkages in China had been re- stored and that they were able to draw on inventory sup- plies and on alternative supply chains; however, in some areas of the country, the construction industry had re- ported continuing disruptions to supply chains from China. Participants indicated that disruptions in the Eu- ropean economy and recent restrictions on travel from Europe to the United States would adversely affect the U.S. economy’s supply chains; so too, if it eventuated, would a large increase in U.S. worker unavailability be- cause of health reasons. Several participants emphasized concern about the capacity of the health care system in the current situation and welcomed measures taken to prevent the system’s overall capacity from being ex- ceeded. Participants noted that foreign economic growth for the first half of this year would be badly hit by the severe disruptions to economic activity abroad associated with the response to the coronavirus outbreak, including the recent measures taken in major European countries. However, some encouraging signs had come from China in recent weeks in the form of indications of increasing production and of more purchases of U.S. goods. With regard to the labor market, participants noted that some firms would likely need to cut employment imme- diately. Other firms, however, were looking for ways to retain employees during the period of reduced economic activity, in order to maintain capacity and be able to ramp up production once the public health crisis abated and demand rebounded. Measures that reportedly helped partially substitute for layoffs included the en- couragement by employers of voluntary leaves of ab- sence, non-replacement of departing workers, and in- creased reliance on the delivery of goods to customers in place of on-site purchases. Participants observed that businesses would be more likely to lay off workers on a major scale if the downturn in economic activity came to be perceived as likely to be protracted. Participants commented that workers most severely affected in the current situation were those who were ill, those with low incomes, those connected to the most hard-hit sectors, and those with irregular or contingent employment. They also noted that many workers had jobs that did not permit working from home. With regard to inflation, participants noted that it had been running below the Committee’s 2 percent longer- run objective before the coronavirus outbreak. They re- marked that a stronger dollar, weaker demand, and lower oil prices were factors likely to put downward pressure on inflation in the period ahead and observed that this meant that the return of inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective would likely be further delayed. Participants indicated, however, that imple- menting a more accommodative stance of monetary pol- icy at this meeting could be useful in helping offset these factors over time and in achieving the 2 percent inflation Minutes of the Meeting of March 15, 2020Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ objective over the longer run, by helping prevent cir- cumstances of persistent resource slack or a lasting de- cline in inflation expectations. Participants all agreed that the effects of the pandemic would weigh on economic activity in the near term and that the duration of this period of weakness was uncer- tain. They further concurred that the unpredictable ef- fects of the coronavirus outbreak were a source of major downside risks to the economic outlook. Participants raised several alternative scenarios with regard to the likely behavior of economic activity in the second half of this year. These scenarios differed from one another in the assumed length and severity of disruptions to eco- nomic activity. Several participants emphasized that the temporary nature of the shock to economic activity, the fact that the shock arose in the nonfinancial sector, and the healthy state of the U.S. banking system all implied that the current situation was not directly comparable with the previous decade’s financial crisis and it need not be followed by negative effects on economic activity as long-lasting as those associated with that crisis. Partici- pants stressed that measures taken in the areas of health care policy and fiscal policy, together with actions by the private sector, would be important in shaping the timing and speed of the U.S. economy’s return to normal con- ditions. Participants agreed that the Federal Reserve’s efforts to relieve stress in financial markets would help limit downside near-term outcomes by supporting credit flows to households and businesses, and that a more ac- commodative monetary policy stance would provide support to economic activity beyond the near term. Among the downside risks to this year’s U.S. economic outlook, participants prominently cited the possibility of the virus outbreak becoming more widespread than ex- pected. Such an event could lead to more wide-ranging temporary shutdowns, with adverse implications for the production of goods and services and for aggregate de- mand. With regard to financial developments over the inter- meeting period, participants noted that financial markets had exhibited extraordinary turbulence and stresses. Participants commented on the conditions of high vola- tility and illiquidity characterizing the markets for U.S. Treasury securities, especially off-the-run longer-term securities, and for agency MBS. Participants expressed concern about the disruptions to the functioning of these markets, especially in view of their status as cor- nerstones for the operation of the U.S. and global finan- cial systems and for the transmission of monetary policy. Participants observed that Federal Reserve operations in recent days had provided some relief with regard to the liquidity problems, but they noted that severe illiquidity continued to prevail in key securities markets. Many par- ticipants pointed to other dislocations in funding mar- kets that could impede financial intermediation to households and businesses. They highlighted the acute problems that many firms were facing in issuing CP and corporate bonds. Participants further noted that many businesses were tapping their backup credit lines with commercial banks. Participants also discussed the im- plications of recent financial market turbulence for money market funds and government bond funds and for debt issuance by state and local governments. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, most participants judged that it would be appropriate to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 100 basis points, to 0 to ¼ percent. In discussing the reasons for such a decision, these participants pointed to a likely decline in economic activity in the near term re- lated to the effects of the coronavirus outbreak and the extremely large degree of uncertainty regarding how long and severe such a decline in activity would be. In light of the sharply increased downside risks to the economic outlook posed by the global coronavirus outbreak, these participants noted that risk-management considerations pointed toward a forceful monetary policy response, with the majority favoring a 100 basis point cut that would bring the target range to its effective lower bound (ELB). With regard to monetary policy beyond this meeting, these participants judged that it would be ap- propriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent until policymakers were con- fident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the Committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. A few participants preferred a 50 basis point cut at this meeting and noted that such a decision would provide support to economic activity in the face of the antici- pated effects of the coronavirus. These participants pre- ferred to wait until there was greater assurance that the transmission mechanism of monetary policy via financial markets and the supply of credit to households and busi- nesses was working effectively. This would allow fiscal and public health policy responses to the coronavirus outbreak to take hold and preserve the ability of the Committee to lower the target range, which was close to the ELB, in the event of a further deterioration in the economic outlook. In addition, these participants noted that a lowering of the target range by 100 basis points, coming so soon after the reduction of 50 basis points less than two weeks earlier, ran the risk of sending an overly negative signal about the economic outlook. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Participants also considered open market operations to purchase Treasury securities and agency MBS to support the smooth functioning of these securities markets, which in turn would help support the supply of credit to households and businesses. Participants generally agreed that, over the coming months, it would be appro- priate to increase the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities by at least $500 billion and its hold- ings of agency MBS by at least $200 billion. Addition- ally, all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS would be rein- vested in agency MBS. Those Treasury and agency MBS purchases would be in addition to the recently expanded overnight and term repo operations conducted by the Desk. Participants stressed that it was important to communicate that the Committee would be prepared to increase the size of the securities purchases, as needed, on the basis of its close monitoring of market condi- tions. Some participants noted that it was important to stress in communications that the primary purpose of these asset purchases was to support the smooth func- tioning of Treasury and agency MBS markets rather than to provide further monetary policy accommodation by pushing down longer-term yields. A couple of partici- pants noted that because some of the purchases would be at longer maturities, the purchases could provide some accommodation by lowering longer-term yields. Participants discussed some of the possible communica- tions challenges associated with the Committee’s policy decisions at this meeting. Several participants noted that it would be important to communicate clearly and con- sistently about the rationale for the policy decisions taken at this meeting. Some participants remarked that the Committee’s policy actions regarding the target range and balance sheet could be interpreted as convey- ing negative news about the economic outlook. A few participants also remarked that lowering the target range to the ELB could increase the likelihood that some mar- ket interest rates would turn negative, or foster investor expectations of negative policy rates. Such expectations would run counter to participants’ previously expressed views that they would prefer to use other monetary pol- icy tools to provide further accommodation at the ELB. Additionally, several participants remarked that the pub- lic might view the ability of the Committee to provide further monetary policy accommodation as being lim- ited. However, some participants noted that the Com- mittee would still be able to provide monetary policy ac- commodation even after lowering the target range for the federal funds rate to the ELB. In particular, new forward guidance or balance sheet measures could be in- troduced. Participants also indicated strong support for related ac- tions taken by the Board of Governors to support the credit needs of households and businesses: • • • • to lower the primary credit rate by 150 basis points to ¼ percent and to allow depository in- stitutions to borrow from the discount window for periods as long as 90 days in order to encour- age more active use of the discount window on the part of depository institutions to meet unex- pected funding needs to encourage depository institutions to utilize in- traday credit to support the provision of liquidity to households and businesses and the smooth functioning of payment systems to encourage banks to use their capital and li- quidity buffers as they provide loans to house- holds and businesses affected by the coronavirus and undertake other supportive actions in a safe and sound manner to reduce reserve requirements to 0 percent in light of the shift to an ample-reserves regime and to support lending to households and businesses by depository institutions Participants also indicated support for enhancing, in co- ordination with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of Eng- land, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank, the provision of liquidity via the standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap line arrangements. The pricing on the standing U.S. dollar swap arrange- ments would be lowered by 25 basis points so that the new rate would be the U.S. dollar OIS rate plus 25 basis points, and U.S. dollars would be offered by foreign cen- tral banks with an 84-day maturity, in addition to the 1-week maturity operations. Following this discussion, the Chair indicated that these changes to the standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap line arrangements would be implemented consistent with the procedures described in the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations. Participants generally commented that these additional measures would be helpful in supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. A few participants commented that stigma associated with the discount window may still be present or that further action, such as a relaunch of the Term Auction Facility, might be needed to encourage banks to take up additional fund- ing. A few other participants noted that discount win- Minutes of the Meeting of March 15, 2020Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ dow stigma should be less of a concern than it was pre- viously. In particular, these participants cited the lower- ing of the primary credit rate to the top of the target range for the federal funds rate, offering term funding for up to 90 days, and regulators encouraging banks to use the discount window to continue prudently lending to households and businesses. Several participants com- mented that banks should be discouraged from repur- chasing shares from, or paying dividends to, their equity holders in the wake of the proposed measures. Partici- pants generally noted that other measures to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, including those that relied on section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, might be needed in such an uncertain and rapidly evolving environment and that it would be prudent for the Federal Reserve to develop and remain prepared to implement such measures. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members noted that the coronavirus outbreak had harmed communities and disrupted economic activity in many countries, including the United States, and that global financial conditions had also been significantly af- fected. Available economic data showed that the U.S. economy came into this challenging period on a strong footing, with a strong labor market, a low unemploy- ment rate, and moderate growth in household spending, although business fixed investment and exports had re- mained weak. More recently, the energy sector had come under stress. On a 12-month basis, overall infla- tion and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation had declined, and survey- based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed. Members judged that the effects of the coronavirus would weigh on economic activity in the near term and would pose risks to the economic outlook. In light of these developments, almost all members agreed to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 0 to ¼ per- cent. These members expected that the target range would be maintained at this level until they were confi- dent that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the Committee’s maximum em- ployment and price stability goals. One member pre- ferred to lower the target range by 50 basis points, to ½ to ¾ percent, at this meeting, in support of the actions taken to promote smooth market functioning and the flow of credit to households and businesses and in light of the anticipated effects of the coronavirus on eco- nomic activity and the economic outlook. In this partic- ipant’s view, a 50 basis point cut would preserve space for further cuts in the target range that could be imple- mented when market conditions had improved enough to ensure that the monetary policy transmission mecha- nism was functioning. Members noted that they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information related to public health as well as global developments and muted inflation pres- sures, and that the Committee would use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. Members observed that, in determining the timing and size of fu- ture adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, the Committee would assess realized and expected eco- nomic conditions relative to its maximum-employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. They also agreed that those assessments would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pres- sures and inflation expectations, and readings on finan- cial and international developments. Members emphasized that the Federal Reserve was pre- pared to use its full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and thereby pro- mote its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. To support the smooth functioning of markets for Treasury securities and agency MBS that are central to the flow of credit to households and businesses, over coming months the Committee agreed to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $500 billion and its holdings of agency MBS by at least $200 billion. The Committee also agreed to reinvest all principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and MBS in agency MBS. In addition, members noted that the Desk had recently expanded its overnight and term repo operations. Members indicated that they would continue to closely monitor market conditions and that the Committee was prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive: “Effective March 16, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Desk to increase over coming months the Sys- tem Open Market Account holdings of Treas- ury securities and agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) by at least $500 billion and by at least $200 billion, respectively. The Committee instructs the Desk to conduct these purchases at a pace appropriate to support the smooth functioning of markets for Treasury securities and agency MBS. The Committee also directs the Desk to con- tinue conducting term and overnight repur- chase agreement operations to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample and to sup- port the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar funding markets. In addition, the Com- mittee directs the Desk to conduct overnight re- verse repurchase operations (and reverse repur- chase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate week- end, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 0.00 percent, in amounts lim- ited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and to reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities re- ceived during each calendar month in agency mortgage-backed securities. Small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 5:00 p.m.: “The coronavirus outbreak has harmed com- munities and disrupted economic activity in many countries, including the United States. Global financial conditions have also been sig- nificantly affected. Available economic data show that the U.S. economy came into this chal- lenging period on a strong footing. Information received since the Federal Open Market Com- mittee met in January indicates that the labor market remained strong through February and economic activity rose at a moderate rate. Job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has re- mained low. Although household spending rose at a moderate pace, business fixed invest- ment and exports remained weak. More re- cently, the energy sector has come under stress. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and infla- tion for items other than food and energy are Market-based running below 2 percent. measures of inflation compensation have de- clined; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. The effects of the corona- virus will weigh on economic activity in the near term and pose risks to the economic outlook. In light of these developments, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the economy has weathered re- cent events and is on track to achieve its maxi- mum employment and price stability goals. This action will help support economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation re- turning to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information re- lated to public health, as well as global develop- ments and muted inflation pressures, and will use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of mon- etary policy, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments. Minutes of the Meeting of March 15, 2020Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The Federal Reserve is prepared to use its full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and thereby pro- mote its maximum employment and price sta- bility goals. To support the smooth functioning of markets for Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities that are central to the flow of credit to households and businesses, over coming months the Committee will in- crease its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $500 billion and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $200 bil- lion. The Committee will also reinvest all prin- cipal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se- curities. In addition, the Open Market Desk has recently expanded its overnight and term repur- chase agreement operations. The Committee will continue to closely monitor market condi- tions and is prepared to adjust its plans as ap- propriate.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: Loretta J. Mester President Mester was fully supportive of all of the ac- tions taken to promote the smooth functioning of mar- kets and the flow of credit to households and businesses but voted against the FOMC action because she pre- ferred to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate to ½ to ¾ percent at this meeting. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 0 to ¼ percent, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to lower the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 0.10 percent and voted unanimously to approve a 1½ percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to 0.25 percent, effective March 16, 2020. The Board also approved changes to allow Reserve Banks to extend primary credit loans for as long as 90 days and that could be prepaid or renewed on re- quest. In addition, the Board approved a reduction in reserve requirement ratios applicable to net transaction deposits above the exemption threshold to 0 percent ef- fective with the reserve maintenance period beginning on March 26, 2020. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, April 28– 29, 2020. The meeting adjourned at 2:40 p.m. on March 15, 2020. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on February 18, 2020, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 28–29, 2020. Videoconference meeting of March 2 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconfer- ence on March 2, 2020, at 7:30 p.m. to review develop- ments related to the outbreak of the coronavirus and dis- cuss steps that could be taken to provide support to the economy. As background for the Committee’s discus- sion, the staff reviewed recent developments in financial markets and provided an assessment of the evolving risks to the economic outlook. The SOMA manager noted that since mid-February when concerns about the spread of the coronavirus be- yond China had begun to intensify, global risk asset prices and sovereign yields had declined sharply. U.S. and global equity indexes were lower than at the time of the Committee’s meeting in January and implied equity market volatility had risen to levels not seen since 2015. The deterioration in risk sentiment had also been re- flected in a significant widening in U.S. and European corporate credit spreads and in peripheral European spreads. Amid the ongoing market volatility, issuance of investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds and of leveraged loans had generally dried up. Money markets had been resilient during the broader financial market volatility; pricing and trading conditions in offshore U.S. dollar funding markets had also been stable. Market functioning had remained orderly despite deterioration in liquidity conditions in Treasury, equity, and credit markets. Financial market participants’ views on the likely course of U.S. monetary policy had changed since the Commit- tee’s January meeting. The expected path of the federal funds rate embedded in futures prices had shifted down significantly over the period. Market commentary had interpreted Chair Powell’s February 28 statement as in- dicating the FOMC was prepared to lower the target range for the federal funds rate at or before the March meeting to support the achievement of the Committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. Expec- tations for global monetary and fiscal easing had in- Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ creased, with some market commentary noting the pos- sibility of a coordinated effort across central banks or fiscal authorities. The SOMA manager noted that the situation remained highly fluid with key risks, including those associated with funding for corporate borrowers, operational vul- nerabilities associated with the transition to alternative work arrangements, and the potential for impaired mar- ket functioning. The staff then provided an update on current conditions and changes to the economic outlook since the FOMC’s January meeting. Available indicators for China sug- gested that the spread of the coronavirus had been asso- ciated with a collapse in economic activity during the first quarter, with spillovers to the global economy from the drop in Chinese demand and disruption of supply chains. Although there were some tentative signs that the coronavirus in China was being contained and pro- duction was beginning to resume, the outbreak of the virus in other foreign economies was weighing on con- sumer and business sentiment and depressing consump- tion in those countries. All told, foreign economic ac- tivity was expected to be significantly weaker during the first half of 2020 than the staff had anticipated at the time of the January FOMC meeting. The staff noted that the spread of the virus was at an earlier stage in the United States and its effects were not yet visible in monthly economic indicators, although there had been some softening in daily sentiment in- dexes and travel-related transactions. The outlook for real economic activity over the remainder of the year was highly uncertain and depended on the spread of the virus and the measures taken to contain it. Scenarios involv- ing a greater spread of the coronavirus and more severe social-distancing actions would be associated with a greater shutdown of production and disruption of sup- ply chains, larger negative effects on consumer and busi- ness sentiment, more significant increases in unemploy- ment, and worsening financial conditions. Reductions in demand, coupled with a stronger U.S. dollar and weaker commodity prices, were expected to put down- ward pressure on inflation, with the magnitude of the softening in core inflation depending on the severity of the situation. FOMC participants discussed the significant outbreaks of the coronavirus that had emerged recently in a few countries outside China and the likelihood that the virus would spread widely around the world, including in the United States. While the economic outlook at the time of the Committee’s January meeting had been favorable, the potential spread of the virus and the measures needed to protect communities from it represented a material downside risk to the U.S. economy. A forceful monetary policy action could provide a clear signal to the public that policymakers recognized the potential eco- nomic significance of the situation and were willing to move decisively to support the achievement of the Com- mittee’s dual mandate goals and counter the recent tight- ening of financial conditions. Although a reduction in the policy rate would not slow the spread of infection or remedy broken supply chains, it could help shore up the confidence of households, businesses, and financial mar- kets; ease financial strains of consumers and firms; and provide meaningful support to the economy in the face of a large shock to demand. Accordingly, participants supported a reduction of 50 basis points in the target range for the federal funds rate. On March 3, 2020, the Committee completed the vote to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: “Effective March 4, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to under- take open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1 to 1¼ percent. In light of recent and ex- pected increases in the Federal Reserve’s non- reserve liabilities, the Committee directs the Desk to continue purchasing Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of 2020 to maintain over time ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September 2019. The Committee also directs the Desk to con- tinue conducting term and overnight repur- chase agreement operations at least through April 2020 to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of sharp in- creases in non-reserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation. In ad- dition, the Committee directs the Desk to con- duct overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with matur- ities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trad- ing conventions) at an offering rate of 1.00 per- cent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for Minutes of the Meeting of March 15, 2020Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and to continue reinvesting all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities received during each calendar month. Principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in Treasury securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities outstanding; principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month will continue to be rein- vested in agency mortgage-backed securities. Small deviations from these amounts for oper- ational reasons are acceptable. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” ing risks to economic activity. In light of these risks and in support of achieving its maximum employment and price stability goals, the Fed- eral Open Market Committee decided today to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by ½ percentage point, to 1 to 1¼ percent. The Committee is closely monitoring developments and their implications for the economic outlook and will use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1 to 1¼ per- cent, the Board of Governors completed on March 3, 2020, unanimous votes to lower the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 1.10 percent and to approve a ½ percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to 1.75 percent, effective March 4, 2020. The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 10:00 a.m. on March 3, 2020: “The fundamentals of the U.S. economy remain strong. However, the coronavirus poses evolv- _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee April 28–29, 2020 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by conference call on Tuesday, April 28, 2020, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, April 29, 2020, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Patrick Harker Robert S. Kaplan Neel Kashkari Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Michael Dotsey, Joseph W. Gruber, David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Mark L.J. Wright, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz,2 Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Ellen E. Meade, Chiara Scotti, and Ivan Vidangos, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian M. Doyle, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; John J. Stevens, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Marnie Gillis DeBoer and Min Wei, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Eric C. Engstrom, Deputy Associate Director, Division Board of Governors of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Patrick E. McCabe and John M. Roberts, Deputy 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended Tuesday’s session only. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Andrea Raffo, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Brian J. Bonis and Rebecca Zarutskie, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Ricardo Correa, Assistant Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,2 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo, Edward Herbst, and Ander Perez- Orive, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ron Feldman, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Sylvain Leduc, Daleep Singh, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, San Francisco, New York, and St. Louis, respectively Spencer Krane, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Scott Frame, Anna Kovner, Giovanni Olivei, and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, New York, Boston, and New York, respectively A. Lee Smith, Research and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The System Open Market Account (SOMA) manager first discussed developments in financial markets. Fi- nancial conditions had shown notable improvement over recent weeks. Equity price indexes were up sub- stantially from the lows of late March, safe-haven de- mands for the dollar had receded, and measures of real- ized and implied volatility across markets had dimin- ished. Market participants pointed to swift and forceful actions taken by the Federal Reserve, coupled with strong fiscal measures, and some indications of a slowing in the spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) in major economies as factors contributing to these develop- ments. That said, market participants remained very uncertain about the economic outlook, and contacts highlighted an array of remaining risks, including those in corporate credit markets, emerging markets, and mortgage mar- kets. In corporate credit markets, concerns about po- tential defaults were rising, and ratings agencies had put on negative watch or downgraded many issuers. In emerging markets, the steep decline in commodity prices was exacerbating financial pressures for some emerging market economies (EMEs), which were also facing strains arising from capital outflows and a reduction in trade activity. And in mortgage markets, the likely in- crease in mortgage delinquencies associated with for- bearance polices and an eventual rise in defaults were sources of concern for bank and nonbank lenders. Open Market Desk surveys suggested that market par- ticipants anticipated a sharp near-term decline in eco- nomic activity, followed by some recovery later this year. Against this backdrop, market participants generally ex- pected the target range for the federal funds rate to re- main at the effective lower bound for the next couple of years. Respondents to Desk surveys attached almost no probability to the FOMC implementing negative policy rates. Some survey respondents indicated that they ex- pected modifications to the Committee’s forward guid- ance, but not at the current meeting. The manager then reviewed recent open market opera- tions. Since mid-March, at the direction of the FOMC, the Desk had purchased very large quantities of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in order to support the smooth functioning of these critical mar- kets. The Desk evaluated a broad array of indicators to assess market functioning. These indicators suggested considerable improvement in market functioning, and the Desk gradually scaled back the pace of purchases ac- cordingly. Market participants anticipated that the pace of purchases would slow after the June meeting, but they expected that outright securities holdings in the SOMA portfolio would continue to expand at least through the end of the year. The SOMA manager expected that, if Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ conditions continued to improve, the pace of purchases could be reduced somewhat further; however, consistent with the directive, the Desk was prepared to increase purchases as needed should market functioning worsen. Conditions in money markets had improved over recent weeks. The intense strains across a range of short-term funding markets that emerged in March had subsided. The expansion of Federal Reserve repurchase agreement (repo) operations, the enhancement and expansion of funding available through the discount window and swap lines, and the funding provided through the Pri- mary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF), and the Com- mercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) were likely im- portant in relieving pressures across a range of short- term funding markets. The manager noted that, despite these improvements, rates in some term funding mar- kets remained elevated, although forward measures sug- gested the upward pressure on these rates might ease in coming weeks. With conditions in short-term funding markets having improved substantially and with repo operations no longer needed to maintain ample reserve levels, the manager noted that it might be appropriate to position the Federal Reserve’s repurchase operations in a backstop role. For example, the minimum bid rate in repo operations could be increased somewhat relative to the level of the interest rate on excess reserves (the IOER rate). Later in the intermeeting period, short-term interest rates drifted lower and settled at near-zero levels. Al- though rates appeared stable, the manager suggested that circumstances could arise in which temporarily raising the per-counterparty limit on the overnight reverse repo operation would support policy implementation. The manager also noted that some market participants antic- ipated that the Federal Reserve might increase the IOER rate in order to move the federal funds rate closer to the middle of the target range and to address market func- tioning issues that could arise over time with overnight rates at very low levels. However, there appeared to be limited risk that the federal funds rate would move be- low the target range, as the Federal Home Loan Banks— the dominant lenders in the federal funds market—can earn a zero rate on balances maintained in their account at the Federal Reserve. Moreover, there were few signs to date that the low level of overnight funding rates had adversely affected market functioning, and trading vol- umes remained robust. The SOMA manager noted that the staff would continue to monitor developments. The Committee voted unanimously to renew the recip- rocal currency arrangements with the Bank of Canada and the Bank of Mexico; these arrangements are associ- ated with the Federal Reserve’s participation in the North American Framework Agreement of 1994. In ad- dition, the Committee voted unanimously to renew the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss Na- tional Bank. The votes to renew the Federal Reserve’s participation in these standing arrangements occur an- nually at the April or May FOMC meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The coronavirus outbreak and the measures taken to protect public health were severely disrupting economic activity in the United States and abroad. The available information for the April 28–29 meeting indicated that U.S. labor market conditions deteriorated substantially in March and April, and real gross domestic product (GDP) declined sharply in the first quarter of the year. In addition, a variety of economic indicators were al- ready pointing toward an extraordinary contraction in GDP in the second quarter. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), remained below 2 percent in February. Job losses surged in March, even though the drop in to- tal nonfarm payroll employment reflected only those changes that had occurred through the mid-month ref- erence period of the establishment survey. In addition, the unemployment rate jumped to 4.4 percent in March, and the labor force participation rate decreased notably. After economic shutdowns started to occur on a wide- spread basis, initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits skyrocketed in the second half of March through the first half of April, a development that pointed to substantial job losses in April. Nominal wage growth remained moderate, as average hourly earnings for all employees increased 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending in March. Total PCE price inflation and core PCE price inflation, which excludes consumer food and energy prices, both increased 1.8 percent over the 12 months ending in Feb- ruary. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 28–29, 2020Page 3 of Dallas was 2.0 percent in February. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending in March, and the core CPI increased 2.1 percent over the same period. The total CPI rose less than the core CPI mostly because of substantial declines in con- sumer energy prices, which were reflecting significantly lower crude oil prices. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. The University of Michigan Sur- veys of Consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years edged up in April, and the 3-year-ahead measure from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Con- sumer Expectations edged down in March; both measures remained in their recent ranges. Real PCE declined steeply in the first quarter of the year. The components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate PCE, along with the sales of light motor vehi- cles, fell substantially in March, reflecting the effects of the widespread economic shutdowns. Moreover, the consumer sentiment measures from both the Michigan and the Conference Board surveys deteriorated substan- tially over March and April. Real disposable personal income was about flat in the first quarter, so the personal saving rate moved up notably with the decline in spend- ing. In contrast to other sectors of the economy, real resi- dential investment expanded strongly in the first quarter as a whole, although housing-sector activity had started to slow dramatically late in the quarter. Starts and build- ing permit issuance for single-family homes, along with starts of multifamily units, tumbled in March. In addi- tion, sales of both new and existing homes contracted sharply in March, and survey measures of builders’ sen- timent plunged in April. Real business fixed investment slumped in the first quar- ter following moderate declines over the previous three quarters. Spending for business equipment fell consid- erably in the first quarter, led by a sharp decrease in pur- chases of transportation equipment. Business invest- ment in nonresidential structures also dropped notably. The coronavirus outbreak and the effects on economic activity of measures to contain it, together with the as- sociated elevated level of uncertainty, were likely re- flected in recent downbeat readings on business senti- ment in national and regional surveys and appeared to weigh heavily on business investment. In addition, the effects of substantial further declines in crude oil prices were being seen in the falling number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation through late April, an indi- cator of business spending on structures in the drilling and mining sector. Total industrial production fell precipitously in March, as the coronavirus outbreak led many factories to close late in the month. The decline in manufacturing output was led by a pullback in the production of motor vehi- cles and related parts. Output in the mining sector— which includes crude oil extraction—also decreased sig- nificantly in the wake of the recent declines in crude oil prices. Total real government purchases only edged up in the first quarter, led by a modest increase in federal pur- chases. State and local purchases were about flat, reflect- ing the effects of public school closures beginning in mid-March. Real exports declined sharply in the first quarter. How- ever, imports declined at a much faster rate so that net exports made a sizable positive contribution to GDP growth. Much of the quarterly decline in trade volumes reflected a sharp drop in March due to weak demand globally and disruptions related to the coronavirus out- break. The fall in exports was concentrated in services, particularly those parts of the sector held down by travel restrictions. Foreign economic activity fell sharply in the first quarter of the year amid widespread mandatory business shut- downs and strict social-distancing measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus outbreak. In China, where lockdowns were first implemented, real GDP contracted sharply in the first quarter, and Canada, Korea, and Sin- gapore also saw substantial declines. Monthly indicators suggested that activity also plummeted in March and April in many other economies, particularly in the euro area and the United Kingdom, which both saw purchas- ing managers indexes fall to record-low levels. Many foreign governments announced large fiscal packages to address the sudden loss of income by firms and house- holds. Many foreign central banks cut policy rates, initi- ated or enhanced credit facilities, relaxed capital require- ments for financial institutions, and ramped up asset purchase programs to alleviate liquidity concerns in for- eign capital markets. Foreign inflation fell steeply, re- flecting large drops in energy prices related to plunging oil prices, while core inflation pressures generally re- mained muted. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Staff Review of the Financial Situation In the middle part of March, financial markets experi- enced record declines in the prices of risky assets, wide- spread illiquidity, and elevated volatility, as uncertainty regarding the effects of the coronavirus outbreak on the global economy jumped. However, following the an- nouncement and subsequent launching of a number of Federal Reserve emergency liquidity programs, the pas- sage of the Cares Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Eco- nomic Security Act), and early signs of a decline in out- break intensity in the United States and many major for- eign economies, the extreme volatility and illiquidity sub- sided and prices of most risky assets increased notably. Over the intermeeting period, on net, the S&P 500 index rose, option-implied volatility fell, and Treasury yields declined, while corporate bond spreads widened some- what. Financing conditions for businesses, households, and state and local governments were strained over the intermeeting period. However, the Federal Reserve’s announcements and start-ups of emergency liquidity fa- cilities appeared to improve conditions in many of these markets. These facilities were established with the ap- proval of the Secretary of the Treasury under the author- ity of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act and were designed to support the flow of credit to businesses, households, and state and local governments. Treasury markets experienced extreme volatility in mid- March, and market liquidity became substantially im- paired as investors sold large volumes of medium- and long-term Treasury securities. Following a period of ex- traordinarily rapid purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS by the Federal Reserve, Treasury market li- quidity gradually improved through the remainder of the intermeeting period, and Treasury yields became less volatile. Although market depth remained exceptionally low and bid-ask spreads for off-the-run securities and long-term on-the-run securities remained elevated, bid- ask spreads for short-term on-the-run securities fell close to levels seen earlier in the year. Yields on nominal Treasury securities declined across the maturity spec- trum, with the 10- and 30-year yields ending the period near all-time lows. A straight read of market quotes sug- gested that the expected federal funds rate would remain under 25 basis points through 2022. Measures of infla- tion compensation based on Treasury Inflation- Protected Securities (TIPS) ended the period higher, on net, but were still low by historical standards. Inflation compensation fell sharply in the first half of March but subsequently recovered, as overall financial conditions and TIPS liquidity improved. The market for agency MBS also experienced substantial stresses in mid-March, and agency MBS spreads to Treasury yields widened and were volatile. However, market conditions for agency MBS improved significantly in the second half of March, supported by the Federal Reserve’s additional purchases of these securities. Stock price indexes were exceptionally volatile early in the intermeeting period, and one-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index reached a record high. Equity market volatility moved down substantially over the remainder of the intermeeting period but remained elevated, and equity prices more than retraced their ear- lier declines to end the intermeeting period notably higher. Broad stock price index increases over the inter- meeting period were led by the energy, consumer discre- tionary, basic materials, and health-care sectors. Broad equity price indexes remained, however, markedly below peaks registered earlier this year. Corporate bond spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury yields wid- ened sharply in the beginning of the intermeeting period, and they subsequently retraced most of their increases to end up only somewhat higher on net. Corporate bond spreads at the end of the intermeeting period still stood significantly above their levels in January. In short-term funding markets, strains intensified in mid-March. Spreads of yields of term money market in- struments over comparable-maturity overnight index swap rates increased sharply, and issuance of unsecured commercial paper, negotiable certificates of deposit, and short-term municipal debt declined substantially and shifted to very short maturities. Institutional prime money market funds (MMFs) experienced heavy re- demptions and reportedly faced difficulties selling assets amid impaired secondary-market liquidity. The an- nouncements and start-ups of several Federal Reserve emergency liquidity facilities in the second half of March helped stabilize short-term funding markets, and, by the end of the intermeeting period, spreads had narrowed across the board. Repo rates were elevated in mid- March but normalized following the very large inflows of funds into government MMFs, the expansion of the Federal Reserve’s repo operations, and the announce- ment of the PDCF. The effective federal funds rate was at the top of the target range for a few days following the March FOMC meeting and, after declining in the second half of March, stayed at around 5 basis points for most of April. Early in the period, cascading shutdowns in many coun- tries weighed heavily on risk sentiment abroad. Many foreign financial markets experienced severe illiquidity and substantial volatility, and foreign equity indexes _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 28–29, 2020Page 5 posted large declines. However, extraordinary monetary and fiscal policy actions in the United States and abroad helped improve market sentiment, and most major for- eign equity indexes subsequently rebounded notably. That said, compared with early this year, foreign equity indexes stayed sharply lower, and option-implied equity volatility abroad remained elevated. Advanced-econ- omy sovereign yields were also volatile, but most sover- eign yields ended the period somewhat lower. By the end of the intermeeting period, policy rates in most ma- jor advanced foreign economies (AFEs) were at or near their effective lower bounds. In mid-March, Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI) spreads widened sharply, and capital outflows from EMEs reached record levels. As global sentiment improved somewhat, those capital outflows slowed and EMBI spreads partially retraced earlier increases. Strong demand for dollars amid flight to safety globally, together with disruptions in U.S. short-term funding markets, caused severe strains in funding markets for dollars abroad, especially early in the intermeeting pe- riod. The premiums paid by investors to borrow dollars using the foreign exchange swap market over the costs of directly borrowing dollars widened sharply as the end of the first quarter approached. FOMC actions, includ- ing several changes to the standing central bank liquidity swap lines and a temporary expansion in the number of central bank counterparties, as well as the announce- ment of the FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility, notably improved conditions in the foreign exchange swap market. Nonetheless, con- ditions in this market remained strained. Over the period, the staff’s broad dollar index increased, with the dollar appreciating modestly against AFE cur- rencies and notably against EME currencies. Currencies of vulnerable commodity exporters, such as Mexico and Brazil, depreciated sharply. At the end of the intermeet- ing period, the broad dollar index remained significantly higher than at the beginning of the year. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses were strained in March, particularly for lower-rated firms and small businesses. Federal Reserve announcements of fa- cilities to support the flow of credit to businesses, house- holds, and state and local governments appeared to im- prove financing conditions in many markets, although conditions had yet to normalize. Issuance of specula- tive-grade bonds and leveraged loans was extremely low in March but resumed, at a slow pace, in April. Invest- ment-grade issuance, while relatively slow in early March, was robust following the Federal Reserve’s an- nouncements in late March of the Primary Market Cor- porate Credit Facility and the Secondary Market Corpo- rate Credit Facility. Conditions in the market for corpo- rate bonds and loans improved further in response to the Federal Reserve’s announcement in April that it would expand these facilities to include firms that had been recently downgraded to just below investment- grade status. Commercial and industrial (C&I) lending conditions were somewhat tight. Although C&I loans increased strongly, this increase was largely driven by firms draw- ing down existing lines of credit; they reportedly did so to shore up liquidity for precautionary motives and to meet funding needs. In the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported having tightened their C&I lending standards and terms for firms of all sizes. Credit quality and the earnings outlook of nonfinancial corporations deteriorated substantially, and market analysts forecast a large volume of downgrades of nonfinancial corporate bonds, including a substantial volume from triple-B to speculative grade. Credit conditions for small businesses were tight. Concerns about the finances of state and lo- cal governments contributed to a marked deterioration in credit conditions in the municipal bond market in March. Although strains lessened amid Federal Reserve announcements on emergency lending facilities to sup- port the flow of credit and liquidity to state and local governments—specifically, expansions to the MMLF and the CPFF and the establishment of the Municipal Liquidity Facility—spreads remained high and issuance subdued at the end of the intermeeting period. Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE) were strained. Non-agency commercial mortgage- backed securities (CMBS) issuance shut down, although secondary-market spreads narrowed following the ex- tension of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facil- ity (TALF) to include non-agency CMBS as eligible col- lateral. Meanwhile, agency CMBS issuance continued, supported by the Federal Reserve’s purchases of these securities. Most April SLOOS respondents reported having tightened lending standards for CRE loans. CRE loans on banks’ books increased in the second half of March, in part because banks were unable to securitize some nonresidential loans. Financing conditions in residential mortgage markets were tight for low-rated borrowers and other borrowers who rely on nonconforming mortgages. Many mortgage originators and warehouse lenders announced tighter Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ underwriting standards on new originations. Despite a considerable widening of the spread between the pri- mary mortgage rate and MBS yields, primary mortgage interest rates were low by historical standards, and avail- able indicators suggested that refinancing activity re- mained elevated. The volume of mortgage rate locks for home-purchase loans dropped materially in early April, reflecting in part declines in homebuyer demand and dis- ruptions in the home search and purchase process. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets tight- ened somewhat on net. Spreads on consumer asset- backed securities jumped in mid-March, and primary- market issuance came to a halt. However, in response to the announcement of the TALF and to diminished broader financial market uncertainty, spreads retraced most of their increase in the early part of the period, and primary-market issuance resumed. Though banks in the April SLOOS reported tightening standards on new consumer loans, respondents also experienced weaker demand for all consumer loan types. Auto loan interest rates dropped sharply in early April as manufacturers in- troduced attractive financing programs to boost sales. The staff assessed the stability of the financial system during the coronavirus outbreak. The banking sector, including the large banks, was resilient coming into this period. Banks were able to meet surging demand for draws on credit lines while also building loan loss re- serves to absorb higher expected defaults. In other parts of the financial system, however, some notable vulnera- bilities that had been identified in previous financial sta- bility assessments exacerbated financial strains. In March, institutional prime MMFs and other institutions relying on unstable funding sources faced significant stress, a situation that put in jeopardy the orderly func- tioning of some financial markets. Federal Reserve ac- tions to enhance the liquidity and functioning of key markets reduced these stresses notably. Open-end mu- tual funds that invest in corporate bonds and loans— institutions that typically face a timing mismatch be- tween investors’ ability to redeem shares and the funds’ ability to sell assets—experienced heavy outflows and li- quidity strains in mid-March. Redemptions later eased, however, amid the general improvement in financial markets. Business debt, which appeared to be high com- pared with fundamentals before the coronavirus out- break, seemed poised to rise further as businesses bor- rowed to maintain their capacity to restart operations. Values of CRE faced the risk of large declines in re- sponse to the coronavirus outbreak, although updated readings were not yet available. The staff provided a pre- liminary reading on potential emerging risks to financial stability in the aftermath of the coronavirus outbreak. This reading highlighted possible vulnerabilities in mort- gage servicers, insurance companies, and large, highly leveraged financial intermediaries. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for the U.S. economy prepared by the staff for the April FOMC meeting was downgraded no- tably from the March meeting forecast in response to information on the spread of the coronavirus and the measures undertaken to contain it both at home and abroad. U.S. real GDP was forecast to plummet and the unemployment rate to soar in the second quarter of this year. The substantial fiscal policy measures and mone- tary policy support that had been put in place were ex- pected to help mitigate the deterioration in economic conditions and help boost the recovery. The staff noted that, importantly, the future perfor- mance of the economy would depend on the evolution of the coronavirus outbreak and the measures under- taken to contain it. Under the staff’s baseline assump- tions that the current restrictions on social interactions and business operations would ease gradually this year, real GDP was forecast to rise appreciably and the unem- ployment rate to decline considerably in the second half of the year, although a complete recovery was not ex- pected by year-end. Inflation was projected to weaken this year, reflecting both the deterioration in resource utilization and sizable expected declines in consumer en- ergy prices. Under the baseline assumptions, economic conditions were projected to continue to improve, and inflation to pick back up, over the next two years. The staff observed that uncertainty regarding the eco- nomic effects of the coronavirus outbreak was extremely elevated and that the historical behavior of the U.S. economy in response to past economic shocks pro- vided limited guidance for making judgments about how the economy might evolve over coming quarters. In light of the significant uncertainty and downside risks as- sociated with the evolution of the coronavirus outbreak, how much the economy would weaken, and how long it would take to recover, the staff judged that a more pes- simistic projection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast. In this scenario, a second wave of the corona- virus outbreak, with another round of strict restrictions on social interactions and business operations, was as- sumed to begin around year-end, inducing a decrease in real GDP, a jump in the unemployment rate, and re- newed downward pressure on inflation next year. Com- pared with the baseline, the disruption to economic ac- tivity was more severe and protracted in this scenario, _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 28–29, 2020Page 7 with real GDP and inflation lower and the unemploy- ment rate higher by the end of the medium-term projec- tion. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants noted that the coronavirus outbreak was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. The vi- rus and the measures taken to protect public health were inducing sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job losses. Weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. The disruptions to economic activity here and abroad had significantly affected financial conditions and had im- paired the flow of credit to U.S. households and busi- nesses. Participants judged that the effects of the coronavirus outbreak and the ongoing public health crisis would con- tinue to weigh heavily on economic activity, employ- ment, and inflation in the near term and would pose con- siderable risks to the economic outlook over the me- dium term. Participants assessed that the second quarter would likely see overall economic activity decline at an unprecedented rate. Participants relayed information from their Districts that the burdens of the present crisis would fall disproportionately on the most vulnerable and financially constrained households in the economy. Participants agreed that recently enacted fiscal programs were delivering valuable direct financial aid to house- holds, businesses, and communities that would provide some relief during the economic shutdown. In addition, economic activity was being supported by actions taken by the Federal Reserve, including lending facilities cre- ated under the authority of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, some of which included capital allocated by the U.S. Treasury. These programs had helped maintain the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments, while supporting the smooth functioning of financial markets. Regarding the economic activity of households, partici- pants noted that the pandemic and efforts to mitigate the spread of the disease were having severely adverse ef- fects on aggregate household spending and consumer confidence. Participants reported that consumer spend- ing had plummeted across all parts of the country and in most categories of spending, with especially sharp de- clines in expenditures for categories that had been most affected by social distancing, such as hotel, fuel, air travel, restaurant, theater, and other retail products and services. Participants noted that even after government- imposed social-distancing restrictions came to an end, consumer spending in these categories likely would not return quickly to more normal levels. Survey-based measures of consumer confidence also plunged, a devel- opment that participants and District contacts attributed to households’ concerns regarding the risk of job loss or difficulty in meeting financial obligations. Participants noted that some households experiencing job losses may not immediately face lower total income because of the support from recently enacted fiscal programs. Even in such cases, however, participants observed that house- hold spending would likely be held down by a decrease in confidence and an increase in precautionary saving. Participants noted that business activity and investment spending had also fallen dramatically since the previous meeting as a result of efforts to contain the coronavirus outbreak. Manufacturing output declined sharply in March and was expected by participants to drop even more rapidly in April. In all Districts, some businesses had been forced to close temporarily because of social distancing restrictions. Businesses that were able to re- main open to some degree were also substantially af- fected by the pandemic, with many experiencing either substantial drops in new orders and sales or supply chain disruptions. There were widespread reports from Dis- trict contacts of firms reducing their payrolls and curtail- ing plans for investment spending. Some industries were especially hard hit, including airlines, cruise ships, restau- rants, and tourism. Participants reported that many firms were seeking loans, payment deferrals, or grants to help address critical financial obligations and that the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) was providing val- uable assistance to small businesses in this respect. Par- ticipants also noted the disproportionate burdens or par- ticular challenges being faced by small businesses; these challenges included lower cash buffers, fewer financing options, and, more recently, tighter lending standards. Participants expressed concerns that a large number of small businesses may not be able to endure a shock that had long-lasting financial effects. Participants were fur- ther concerned that even after social-distancing require- ments were eased, some business models may no longer be economically viable, which could occur, for example, if consumers voluntarily continued to avoid participating in particular forms of economic activity. In addition, participants expressed concern that the possibility of secondary outbreaks of the virus may cause businesses for some time to be reluctant to engage in new projects, rehire workers, or make new capital expenditures. Participants observed that conditions in the energy sec- tor had become especially difficult. A sharp reduction Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ in global demand for petroleum had led to unused sup- ply that was overwhelming storage capacity, resulting in a plunge in oil prices. Some participants expressed con- cern that low energy prices, if they were to persist, had the potential to create a wave of bankruptcies in the en- ergy sector. In addition, the agricultural sector was un- der severe stress due to falling prices for some farm commodities and pandemic-related disruptions, such as the closing of some food processing plants. With regard to the labor market, participants noted that incoming data confirmed that an extreme decline in em- ployment was under way. Nationally, initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits had totaled more than 25 million from mid-March to the time of the meeting, and participants expected that the unemployment rate would soon reach the highest levels of the post–World War II period. District contacts reported that a signifi- cant portion of workers had been able to switch to work- ing remotely. Although many employers were trying to keep workers on their payrolls, over time, as conditions persisted, there had begun to be widespread furloughs and layoffs. Participants were concerned that temporary layoffs could become permanent, and that workers who lose employment could face a loss of job-specific skills or may become discouraged and exit the labor force. Participants were additionally concerned that employees who were on low incomes would be the most severely affected by job cuts because they were employed in the industries most affected by the response to the outbreak or because their jobs were not amenable to being carried out remotely. With regard to inflation, participants noted that it had been running below the Committee’s 2 percent longer- run objective before the coronavirus outbreak. While the pandemic had created some supply constraints, which had generated upward pressure on the prices of some goods, the pandemic had also reduced demand, which had exerted downward pressure on prices. The overall effect of the outbreak on prices was seen as dis- inflationary. In addition, a stronger dollar and lower oil prices were factors likely to put downward pressure on inflation, and market-based measures of inflation com- pensation remained very low. Participants observed that the return of inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective would likely be further delayed but that the accommodative stance of monetary policy would be helpful in achieving the 2 percent inflation ob- jective over the longer run. Participants noted that recently enacted fiscal programs were crucial for limiting the severity of the economic downturn. In particular, the Cares Act and other legis- lation, which represented more than $2 trillion in federal spending in total, had provided direct help to house- holds, businesses, and communities. For example, the PPP was providing a financial lifeline to small busi- nesses, the expansion of unemployment benefits was helping restore lost income for laid-off workers, and the Treasury had provided a necessary financial backstop to many Federal Reserve lending facilities. Participants acknowledged that even greater fiscal support may be necessary if the economic downturn persists. Participants commented that, in addition to weighing heavily on economic activity in the near term, the eco- nomic effects of the pandemic created an extraordinary amount of uncertainty and considerable risks to eco- nomic activity in the medium term. Participants dis- cussed several alternative scenarios with regard to the behavior of economic activity in the medium term that all seemed about equally likely. These scenarios differed in the assumed length of the pandemic and the conse- quent economic disruptions. On the one hand, a num- ber of participants judged that there was a substantial likelihood of additional waves of outbreak in the near or medium term. In such scenarios, it was believed likely that there would be further economic disruptions, in- cluding additional periods of mandatory social distanc- ing, greater supply chain dislocations, and a substantial number of business closures and loss of income; in total, such developments could lead to a protracted period of severely reduced economic activity. On the other hand, economic activity could recover more quickly if the pan- demic subsided enough for households and businesses to become sufficiently confident to relax or modify so- cial-distancing behaviors over the next several months. Beyond these considerations, participants noted the risk that foreign economies, particularly EMEs, could come under extreme pressure as a result of the pandemic and that this strain could spill over to and hamper U.S. eco- nomic activity. Participants stressed that measures taken in the areas of health-care policy and fiscal policy, to- gether with actions by the private sector, would be im- portant in shaping the timing and speed of the U.S. economy’s return to more normal conditions. In addition, participants agreed that recent actions taken by the Federal Reserve were essential in helping reduce downside risks to the economic outlook. Participants also noted several risks to long-term eco- nomic performance that were posed by the pandemic. One of these risks was that workers who lose employ- ment as a result of the pandemic may experience a loss of skills, lose access to adequate childcare or eldercare, _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 28–29, 2020Page 9 or become discouraged and exit the labor force. The longer-term behavior of firms could be affected as well—for instance, if necessary but costly transmission- mitigation strategies lowered firms’ productivity; if busi- ness investment shifted down permanently; if many firms need to adjust their business models in the after- math of the pandemic; or if business closures, particu- larly those of small firms, became widespread. A few participants noted that higher levels of government in- debtedness, which would be exacerbated by fiscal ex- penditures that were necessary to combat the economic effects of the pandemic, could put downward pressure on growth in aggregate potential output. Regarding developments in financial markets, partici- pants agreed that ongoing actions by the Federal Reserve had been instrumental in easing strains in some essential financial markets and supporting the flow of credit. These actions included large-scale purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS, measures to reduce strains in global U.S. dollar funding markets, and the launch of programs to support the flow of credit in the economy for households, businesses of all sizes, and state and lo- cal governments. Banks had entered the crisis well cap- italized and had been able to provide necessary credit to businesses and households. A number of participants commented on potential risks to financial stability. Participants were concerned that banks could come under greater stress, particularly if ad- verse scenarios for the spread of the pandemic and eco- nomic activity were realized, and so this sector should be monitored carefully. Participants saw risks to banks and some other financial institutions as exacerbated by high levels of indebtedness among nonfinancial corporations that prevailed before the pandemic; this indebtedness in- creased these firms’ risk of insolvency. The upcoming financial stress tests for banks were seen as important for measuring the ability of large banks to withstand fu- ture downside scenarios. A number of participants em- phasized that regulators should encourage banks to pre- pare for possible downside scenarios by further limiting payouts to shareholders, thereby preserving loss-absorb- ing capital. Indeed, historical loss models might under- state losses in this context. A few participants stressed that the activities of some nonbank financial institutions presented vulnerabilities to the financial system that could worsen in the event of a protracted economic downturn and that these institutions and activities should be monitored closely. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants noted that the Federal Reserve was commit- ted to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. In light of their assessment that the ongoing public health crisis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term, all participants judged that it would be appropriate to main- tain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. Keeping the target range at the effective lower bound, after quickly reducing it by 150 basis points in March, would continue to provide support to the economy and promote the Committee’s maximum em- ployment and price stability goals. Participants also judged that it would be appropriate to maintain the tar- get range for the federal funds rate at its present level until policymakers were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the Committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. Participants also assessed that it was appropriate for the Federal Reserve to continue to purchase Treasury secu- rities and agency residential-mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) and CMBS in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning. These open market pur- chases would continue to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and thereby foster the effec- tive transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. In addition, the Desk would continue to of- fer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. Par- ticipants noted that it was important to continue to mon- itor market conditions closely and that the Committee was prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate to support smooth functioning in the markets for these securities. Participants also commented that the multiple lending facilities established by the Federal Reserve under the authority of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act and, in some cases, involving capital allocated by the Treasury were supporting financial market functioning and the flow of credit to households, businesses of all sizes, and state and local governments. In this way, these emergency lending facilities were intended to help sup- port the economy until pandemic-related credit market disruptions had abated. Several participants commented further that it would be important for the Federal Re- serve to remain ready to adjust these emergency lending facilities as appropriate based on its monitoring of finan- cial market functioning and credit conditions. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ While participants agreed that the current stance of monetary policy remained appropriate, they noted that the Committee could, at upcoming meetings, further clarify its intentions with respect to its future monetary policy decisions. Some participants commented that the Committee could make its forward guidance for the path for the federal funds rate more explicit. For example, the Committee could adopt outcome-based forward guidance that would specify macroeconomic out- comes—such as a certain level of the unemployment rate or of the inflation rate—that must be achieved be- fore the Committee would consider raising the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee could also consider date-based forward guidance that would indicate that the target range could be raised only after a specified amount of time had elapsed. These partici- pants noted that such explicit forms of forward guidance could help ensure that the public’s expectations regard- ing the future conduct of monetary policy continued to reflect the Committee’s intentions. Several participants observed that the completion, most likely later this year, of the monetary policy framework review, together with the announcement of the conclusions arising from the review, would help further clarify the Committee’s in- tentions with respect to its future monetary policy ac- tions. Several participants also remarked that the Com- mittee may need to provide further clarity regarding its intentions for purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS; these participants noted that, without fur- ther communication on this matter, uncertainty about the evolution of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases could increase over time. Several participants remarked that a program of ongoing Treasury securities purchases could be used in the future to keep longer-term yields low. A few participants also noted that the balance sheet could be used to reinforce the Committee’s forward guidance regarding the path of the federal funds rate through Federal Reserve purchases of Treasury securi- ties on a scale necessary to keep Treasury yields at short- to medium-term maturities capped at specified levels for a period of time. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the coronavirus outbreak was caus- ing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. The virus and the measures taken to protect public health were induc- ing sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job losses. Consumer price inflation was being held down by weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices. The disruptions to global economic activity had signifi- cantly affected financial conditions and impaired the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Mem- bers agreed that the Federal Reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. Members further concurred that the ongoing public health crisis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and posed considerable downside risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. In light of these developments, members decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. Members noted that they expected to maintain this target range until they were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the Committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. Members agreed that they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the eco- nomic outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global developments and muted infla- tion pressures, and would use the Committee’s tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. In determin- ing the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, members noted that they would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum employment ob- jective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market condi- tions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and readings on financial and international developments. To support the flow of credit to households and busi- nesses, members agreed that it was appropriate for the Federal Reserve to continue to purchase Treasury secu- rities and agency RMBS and CMBS in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. In addition, the Desk would continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. Members agreed that they would closely monitor market conditions and be prepared to adjust their plans as appropriate. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 28–29, 2020Page 11 “Effective April 30, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. Increase the System Open Market Account holdings of Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and agency commercial mortgage-backed secu- rities (CMBS) in the amounts needed to support the smooth functioning of markets for these securities. • Conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar fund- ing markets. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-counter- party limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS and all principal payments from holdings of agency CMBS in agency CMBS. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. The coronavirus outbreak is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. The virus and the measures taken to protect public health are inducing sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job losses. Weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices are holding down consumer price inflation. The disruptions to economic activity here and abroad have signifi- cantly affected financial conditions and have impaired the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considera- ble risks to the economic outlook over the me- dium term. In light of these developments, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the economy has weath- ered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information re- lated to public health, as well as global develop- ments and muted inflation pressures, and will use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of mon- etary policy, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments. To support the flow of credit to households and businesses, the Federal Reserve will continue to purchase Treasury securities and agency resi- dential and commercial mortgage-backed secu- rities in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader fi- nancial conditions. In addition, the Open Mar- ket Desk will continue to offer large-scale over- night and term repurchase agreement opera- tions. The Committee will closely monitor mar- ket conditions and is prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. The Board of Governors also voted unan- imously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective April 30, 2020. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 9–10, 2020. The meeting adjourned at 10:10 a.m. on April 29, 2020. Notation Votes To address intensifying strains in global financial mar- kets early in the intermeeting period, the Committee unanimously approved the following measures to help maintain the flow of credit to U.S. households and busi- nesses: • By notation vote concluded on March 19, the Com- mittee approved amendments to the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations (“Foreign Author- ization”) and to the Foreign Currency Directive (“Foreign Directive”).3 The Foreign Authorization amendments authorized the establishment of tem- porary U.S. dollar liquidity arrangements (swap lines). The Foreign Directive was amended to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to establish and maintain temporary dollar liquidity arrange- ments with the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Banco Central do Brasil, the Danmarks National- bank (Denmark), the Bank of Korea, the Banco de Mexico, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Norges Bank (Norway), the Monetary Authority of Singapore, and the Sveriges Riksbank (Sweden). These arrangements will be in place for at least six months. Like the Federal Reserve’s standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the Euro- pean Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank, these temporary arrangements should help lessen heightened strains in global U.S. dollar funding mar- kets, thereby mitigating the effects of these strains on the supply of credit to U.S. households and busi- nesses. 3 Committee organizational documents are available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_au- thorizations.htm. • By notation vote concluded on March 23, the Com- mittee approved a statement indicating that the Fed- eral Reserve will continue to purchase Treasury se- curities and agency MBS in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning and effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions and that these purchases will include agency CMBS. In conjunction with approval of the statement, the Committee also authorized and di- rected the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with these planned purchases. Previously, the Com- mittee had announced that it would purchase at least $500 billion of Treasury securities and at least $200 billion of agency MBS. • By notation vote concluded on March 31, the Com- mittee amended the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations to authorize, and adopted a resolution to approve, the establishment of a tem- porary repo facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (FIMA Repo Facility).3 The facility will be in place for at least six months and will allow FIMA account holders to temporarily ex- change their U.S. Treasury securities held with the Federal Reserve for U.S. dollars, which can then be made available to institutions in their jurisdictions. By providing foreign and international monetary au- thorities with an alternative temporary source of U.S. dollars other than sales of securities in the open market, the facility should help support the smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury market. In addi- tion, the FIMA Repo Facility should—along with the U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines the Federal Re- serve has established with other central banks—help ease strains in global U.S. dollar funding markets. By notation vote completed on April 7, 2020, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on March 15, 2020. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 28–29, 2020Page 13 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee June 9–10, 2020 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconference on Tuesday, June 9, 2020, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 10, 2020, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Patrick Harker Robert S. Kaplan Neel Kashkari Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Thomas Laubach, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Marc Giannoni, Trevor A. Reeve, William Wascher, and Mark L.J. Wright, Associate Economists Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Ellen E. Meade, Chiara Scotti, and Ivan Vidangos, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian M. Doyle,3 Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Eric M. Engen, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Edward Nelson4 and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Sally Davies, Associate Director, Division of Account International Finance, Board of Governors; David López-Salido, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. 3 Attended through the discussion of economic developments and the outlook, and all of Wednesday’s session. 4 Attended through the discussion of forward guidance, asset purchases, and yield caps or targets. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Burcu Duygan-Bump, Andrew Figura, Shane M. Sherlund, and Paul A. Smith, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Paul R. Wood,4 Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Brian J. Bonis, Etienne Gagnon, and Zeynep Senyuz, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Matthias Paustian,4 Assistant Director and Chief, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,5 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors; Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Dario Caldara,6 Section Chief, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Mark A. Carlson, Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Canlin Li,4 Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors James Hebden4 and James M. Trevino,4 Senior Technology Analysts, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Andre Anderson, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta David Altig, Joseph W. Gruber, Anna Paulson, Daleep Singh, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, Chicago, New York, and St. Louis, respectively Edward S. Knotek II, Paolo A. Pesenti, Julie Ann Remache,2 Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl,2 Robert G. Valletta, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,2 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, New York, New York, Chicago, San Francisco, and New York, respectively Roc Armenter, Matthew D. Raskin,2 and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, and New York, respectively David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Robert Lerman,2 Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Hess T. Chung,4 Group Manager, Division of Research Daniel Cooper and John A. Weinberg, Senior and Statistics, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo, Bernd Schlusche,4 and Mary Tian, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Maria Otoo, Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Sriya Anbil,4 Erin E. Ferris, and Fabian Winkler, Senior Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; David S. Miller,4 Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Gaston Navarro, Senior Economist, Economists and Policy Advisors, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Richmond, respectively The Chair opened the meeting with an acknowledgment of the extraordinary and deeply troubling events of the last two weeks. Injustice, prejudice, and the callous dis- regard for life had led to social unrest and a sense of des- pair. The Chair noted that it was incumbent upon the leaders of the Federal Reserve System to continue to communicate with force and clarity about the Federal Reserve’s core values, and to reaffirm its unflinching commitment to those values in pursuing the Federal Re- serve’s mandated goals. In that spirit, the Chair noted that he intended to offer the following remarks at the 5 Attended through the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. 6 Attended from the discussion of economic developments and the outlook through the end of Tuesday’s session. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ end of the postmeeting press conference. All partici- pants supported the statement affirming the Federal Re- serve’s core values and its commitment to do everything it can to foster racial equality as well as diversity and in- clusion both within the Federal Reserve System and in society more broadly. I want to acknowledge the tragic events that have again put a spotlight on the pain of racial injustice in this country. The Federal Reserve serves the entire nation. We operate in, and are part of, many of the communities across the country where Americans are grappling with and expressing themselves on issues of racial equality. I speak for my colleagues throughout the Fed- eral Reserve System when I say that there is no place at the Federal Reserve for racism, and there should be no place for it in our society. Everyone deserves the opportunity to partici- pate fully in our society and in our economy. These foundational principles guide us in all we do, from monetary policy to our focus on diver- sity and inclusion in our workplace, and to our work regulating and supervising banks to ensure fair access to credit around the country. We will take this opportunity to renew our steadfast commitment to these principles, making sure that we are playing our part. We understand that the work of the Federal Re- serve touches communities, families, and busi- nesses across the country. Everything we do is in service to our public mission. We are com- mitted to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recov- ery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. Discussion of Forward Guidance, Asset Purchases, and Yield Curve Caps or Targets Participants discussed tools for conducting monetary policy when the federal funds rate is at its effective lower bound (ELB). The discussion addressed two topics: (1) the roles of forward guidance and large-scale asset purchase programs in supporting the attainment of the Committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals and (2) in light of the foreign and historical expe- rience with approaches that cap or target interest rates along the yield curve, whether such approaches could be used to support forward guidance and complement asset purchase programs. The staff briefing on the first topic focused on outcome-based forward guidance for the federal funds rate—which ties changes in the target range for the federal funds rate to the achievement of specified macroeconomic outcomes, such as reaching a given level of the unemployment rate or inflation—and asset purchase programs of the kind used during and fol- lowing the previous recession. The staff presented re- sults from model simulations that suggested that for- ward guidance and large-scale asset purchases can help support the labor market recovery and the return of in- flation to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent inflation goal. The simulations suggested that the Committee would have to maintain highly accommodative financial conditions for many years to quicken meaningfully the recovery from the current severe downturn. The brief- ing addressed factors that might alter the potency of for- ward guidance and asset purchase programs, along with a number of considerations for the design of these ac- tions. The staff cautioned that businesses and house- holds might not be as forward looking as assumed in the model simulations, which could reduce the effectiveness of policies that are predicated on influencing expecta- tions about the path of policy several years into the fu- ture. Alternatively, prompt and forceful policy actions by the Committee might help focus the public’s expec- tations around better outcomes or reduce perceived risks of worst-case scenarios, which could generate more im- mediate macroeconomic benefits than those featured in the staff analysis. The second staff briefing reviewed the yield caps or tar- gets (YCT) policies that the Federal Reserve followed during and after World War II and that the Bank of Ja- pan and the Reserve Bank of Australia are currently em- ploying. These three experiences illustrated different types of YCT policies: During World War II, the Fed- eral Reserve capped yields across the curve to keep Treasury borrowing costs low and stable; since 2016, the Bank of Japan has targeted the 10-year yield to continue to provide accommodation while limiting the potential for an excessive flattening of the yield curve; and, since March 2020, the Reserve Bank of Australia has targeted the three-year yield, a target that is intended to reinforce the bank’s forward guidance for its policy rate and to in- fluence funding rates across much of the Australian economy. The staff noted that these three experiences suggested that credible YCT policies can control govern- ment bond yields, pass through to private rates, and, in the absence of exit considerations, may not require large central bank purchases of government debt. But the staff also highlighted the potential for YCT policies to require the central bank to purchase very sizable Minutes of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ amounts of government debt under certain circum- stances—a potential that was realized in the U.S. experi- ence in the 1940s—and the possibility that, under YCT policies, monetary policy goals might come in conflict with public debt management goals, which could pose risks to the independence of the central bank. In their discussion of forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, participants agreed that the Committee has had extensive experience with these tools, that they were effective in the wake of the previous recession, that they have become key parts of the monetary policy toolkit, and that, as a result, they have important roles to play in supporting the attainment of the Committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Vari- ous participants noted that the economy is likely to need support from highly accommodative monetary policy for some time and that it will be important in coming months for the Committee to provide greater clarity re- garding the likely path of the federal funds rate and asset purchases. Participants generally indicated support for outcome-based forward guidance. A number of partici- pants spoke favorably of forward guidance tied to infla- tion outcomes that could possibly entail a modest tem- porary overshooting of the Committee’s longer-run in- flation goal but where inflation fluctuations would be centered on 2 percent over time. They saw this form of forward guidance as helping reinforce the credibility of the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent inflation objective and potentially preventing a premature withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation. A couple of partici- pants signaled a preference for forward guidance tied to the unemployment rate, noting that it would be more credible to focus on labor market outcomes that have been achieved in the recent past or that—given how high the unemployment rate currently is—such guidance would clearly signal a high degree of accommodation for an extended period. A few others suggested that calendar-based guidance—which specifies a date beyond which accommodation could start to be reduced—might be at least as effective as outcome-based guidance. They noted that calendar-based guidance had been very effec- tive when the Committee used it in 2011 and 2012 or that it would be very challenging to provide credible out- come-based guidance in light of the substantial uncer- tainty surrounding the current economic outlook. Re- gardless of the specific form of forward guidance, a cou- ple of participants expressed the concern that policies that effectively committed the Committee to maintain- ing very low interest rates for a long time could ulti- mately pose significant risks to financial stability. Participants agreed that asset purchase programs can promote accommodative financial conditions by putting downward pressure on term premiums and longer-term yields. Several participants remarked that declines in the neutral rate of interest and in term premiums over the past decade and prevailing low levels of longer-term yields would likely act as constraints on the effectiveness of asset purchases in the current environment and noted that these constraints were not as acute when the Com- mittee implemented such programs in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis. These participants noted, how- ever, that large-scale asset purchases could still be bene- ficial under current circumstances by offsetting potential upward pressures on longer-term yields or by helping re- inforce the Committee’s commitment to maintaining highly accommodative financial conditions. A few par- ticipants questioned the desirability of large-scale asset purchases following the current purchases to support market functioning, noting that they likely would lead to a further considerable expansion of the Federal Re- serve’s balance sheet or have potentially adverse impli- cations for financial stability. In their discussion of the foreign and historical experi- ence with YCT policies and the potential role for such policies in the United States, nearly all participants indi- cated that they had many questions regarding the costs and benefits of such an approach. Among the three ep- isodes discussed in the staff presentation, participants generally saw the Australian experience as most relevant for current circumstances in the United States. None- theless, many participants remarked that, as long as the Committee’s forward guidance remained credible on its own, it was not clear that there would be a need for the Committee to reinforce its forward guidance with the adoption of a YCT policy. In addition, participants raised a number of concerns related to the implementa- tion of YCT policies, including how to maintain control of the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s bal- ance sheet, particularly as the time to exit from such pol- icies nears; how to combine YCT policies—which at least in the Australian case incorporate aspects of date- based forward guidance—with the types of outcome- based forward guidance that many participants favored; how to mitigate the risks that YCT policies pose to cen- tral bank independence; and how to assess the effects of these policies on financial market functioning and the size and composition of private-sector balance sheets. A number of participants commented on additional chal- lenges associated with YCT policies focused on the longer portion of the yield curve, including how these policies might interact with large-scale asset purchase Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ programs and the extent of additional accommodation they would provide in the current environment of very low interest rates. Some of these participants also noted that longer-term yields are importantly influenced by factors such as longer-run inflation expectations and the longer-run neutral real interest rate and that changes in these factors or difficulties in estimating them could re- sult in the central bank inadvertently setting yield caps or targets at inappropriate levels. A couple of participants remarked that an appropriately designed YCT policy that focused on the short-to-medium part of the yield curve could serve as a powerful commitment device for the Committee. These participants noted that, even if mar- ket participants currently expect the federal funds rate to remain at its ELB through the medium term, the intro- duction of an effective YCT policy could help prevent those expectations from changing prematurely—as hap- pened during the previous recovery—or that the size of a large-scale asset purchase program, which also poses risks to central bank independence, could be reduced by an effective YCT policy. All participants agreed that it would be useful for the staff to conduct further analysis of the design and implementation of YCT policies as well as of their likely economic and financial effects. A number of participants emphasized that, when as- sessing the potential roles that different monetary policy tools might play to support the attainment of the Com- mittee’s goals, it was important to think about how var- ious policy tools could be used in coordination as part of the Committee’s overall strategy to achieve its dual- mandate objectives. In addition, various participants noted that clear communications with the public are cen- tral to the efficacy of all policy tools and that, therefore, the Committee should complete its monetary policy framework review in the near term, including revising the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Pol- icy Strategy. Such a revised statement would communi- cate to the public how the Committee views its policy goals and provide additional context to the Committee’s policy actions. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The System Open Market Account (SOMA) manager first discussed developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. Risk asset prices were buoyed by optimism about the potential for increased economic activity associated with reopenings as parts of the United States and other countries relaxed lockdown restrictions. That optimism was reinforced by high-frequency data suggesting a pickup in economic activity. Market partic- ipants also pointed to the suite of U.S. and global policy measures taken since mid-March as laying a foundation for the improvement in risk sentiment. Against this backdrop, staff analysis suggested that equity prices had been supported by expectations for a strong rebound in earnings next year, low risk-free rates and positive risk sentiment. Despite this improvement in risk sentiment, market participants expected weak overall growth in 2020, and elevated uncertainties in the outlook re- mained. The manager noted that prospects for adverse developments regarding the coronavirus (COVID-19) and the potential for financial strains to amplify reces- sionary dynamics, and geopolitical developments, in- cluding renewed U.S.–China tensions, presented near term risks to financial markets. Market participants were also attentive to the recent steepening in the Treasury yield curve and noted a range of uncertainties in the out- look for longer-term rates. Regarding expectations for monetary policy, respond- ents to the Open Market Trading Desk’s surveys sug- gested that most market participants did not anticipate policy changes at the June meeting. The target range for the federal funds rate was expected to remain at the ELB for at least the next couple of years, although many sur- vey respondents attached some probability to the target range increasing in 2022. Although the rates implied by federal funds futures contracts settling next year had fallen to slightly negative levels in May, survey respond- ents attached very little probability to the possibility of negative policy rates. The manager turned to a discussion of Federal Reserve operations. Credit facilities, some of which became op- erational over the period, generally experienced modest activity in light of broad improvements in credit market conditions. New usage across many funding operations and facilities had declined over the intermeeting period as conditions in funding markets improved. The man- ager noted that a significant proportion of amounts out- standing under U.S. dollar liquidity swaps and repur- chase agreements (repo) reflected term transactions ini- tiated during the period of funding market strains. In light of the improvement in funding market conditions, the manager noted that it might be appropriate to make a modest adjustment to the minimum bid rates on repo operations in the forthcoming calendar, which would ef- fectively position these operations in a backstop role. These adjustments were not expected to have any signif- icant effects in short-term funding markets. Finally, the manager discussed the near-term plans for purchases of Treasury securities and agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS). Overall, functioning in the Minutes of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ markets for these securities had improved substantially. In light of these improvements, the Desk had gradually reduced the pace of purchases over the intermeeting pe- riod, to their current levels of $4 billion per day in Treas- ury securities and $4.5 billion per day in agency MBS. These purchase amounts were significantly lower than the peak pace in mid-March and roughly corresponded to monthly increases in SOMA holdings of approxi- mately $80 billion in Treasury securities and $40 billion in agency MBS. Continuing to increase holdings at this pace would likely help sustain the improvements in mar- ket functioning, and seemed to be roughly in line with market expectations for Treasury purchases, and toward the lower end of expectations for agency MBS pur- chases, net of reinvestments. In addition, principal pay- ments from agency debt and agency MBS held in the SOMA portfolio could continue to be reinvested in agency MBS. Weekly operations in agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) would also be con- ducted. The Desk was prepared to increase the size or adjust the composition of Treasury, agency MBS and agency CMBS purchases as needed to sustain smooth market functioning in the markets for these securities. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The coronavirus outbreak and the measures undertaken to contain its spread were severely disrupting economic activity in the United States and abroad. The available information for the June 9–10 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) would likely post a historically large decline in the second quarter. Labor market conditions improved in May, but these im- provements were modest relative to the substantial de- terioration seen over the previous two months. Con- sumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month per- centage change in the price index for personal consump- tion expenditures (PCE), slowed notably through April, reflecting the effects of both weak aggregate demand and low energy prices. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded strongly in May, though by much less than the historic job losses recorded in April. The unemployment rate moved down to 13.3 percent in May after soaring to 14.7 percent in April. As was highlighted by the Bureau of Labor Sta- tistics, these figures likely understated the extent of un- employment; accounting for the unusually large number of workers who reported themselves as employed but absent from their jobs would have raised the unemploy- ment rate by 5 percentage points in April and 3 percent- age points in May. Both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio increased in May. Initial claims for unemployment insurance ben- efits had declined through the last week of May from their peak in late March, but they still were at a histori- cally elevated level. Average hourly earnings for all em- ployees declined in May after rising sharply in April, but these fluctuations largely reflected the substantial changes in the level and composition of employment, which disproportionately affected lower-wage workers. The employment cost index for total labor compensa- tion in the private sector increased 2.8 percent over the 12 months ending in March—a period mostly predating the onset of the pandemic—and was the same as its year- earlier pace. Total PCE price inflation was only 0.5 percent over the 12 months ending in April, reflecting both weak aggre- gate demand in recent months and a considerable drop in consumer energy prices. Prices fell in March and April in many categories that were affected the most by social-distancing measures, such as the prices for air travel and hotel accommodations. Core PCE price in- flation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.0 percent over the 12 months end- ing in April. In contrast, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Dallas was 1.9 percent in April. The consumer price index (CPI) inched up 0.1 percent over the 12 months ending in May, while core CPI infla- tion was 1.2 percent over the same period. Recent read- ings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. The Uni- versity of Michigan Surveys of Consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years edged up in May, while the 3-year- ahead measure from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations was un- changed. The 10-year measure for PCE price inflation from the Survey of Professional Forecasters ticked down in the second quarter. All of these measures of longer- run inflation expectations continued to be near their re- cent ranges. Real PCE slumped in April, with declines widespread across most spending categories. In May, however, light motor vehicle sales and some other high-frequency indi- cators of consumer spending turned up, but the levels of these indicators were mostly still below their levels early in the year. Real disposable personal income increased significantly in April, as a marked decline in wage and Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ salary income was more than offset by a substantial boost from government transfer payments due to recent fiscal policy support; as a result, the personal saving rate soared. The consumer sentiment measures from both the Michigan survey and the Conference Board survey crept up in May but remained below their levels early in the year. Real residential investment appeared to be weakening significantly in the second quarter. Starts and building permit issuance for single-family homes, along with starts of multifamily units, dropped sharply in April. Sales of existing homes contracted markedly in April, al- though new home sales edged up. Real business fixed investment continued to tumble in the second quarter. Nominal new orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft decreased considerably in April. Nominal business spending for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and min- ing sector also fell in April. In addition, the effects of low crude oil prices were evident in further declines in the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation through early June, an indicator of business spending on structures in the drilling and mining sector. Total industrial production plunged in April, as many factories slowed or suspended operation in response to the coronavirus pandemic. The decline in manufactur- ing production was widespread across all major indus- tries and was led by a collapse in the output of motor vehicles and related parts. Output in the mining sec- tor—which includes crude oil extraction—also de- creased, reflecting the effects of low crude oil prices. Total real government purchases appeared to be rising moderately in the second quarter. Federal defense spending continued to increase in April, and nondefense purchases were likely to be boosted in the second quar- ter by recent fiscal policy measures related to the coro- navirus. In contrast, state and local purchases looked to be declining, as the payrolls of these governments shrank in April and May, and nominal state and local construc- tion expenditures decreased in April. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in both March and April, as exports of goods and services plunged more than imports. The fall in goods exports was broad based, with particularly sharp declines in au- tomotive products, industrial supplies, and capital goods. Goods imports also contracted significantly in most categories through April, and a near halt of inter- national travel drove a steep decline in exports and im- ports of services. Foreign economic activity contracted in the first quarter, even though most countries abroad introduced strict social-distancing measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus only toward the end of the quarter. In China, where restrictions were largely lifted by the end of the first quarter, data pointed to a relatively quick re- bound in economic activity in the second quarter. Out- side of China, indicators suggested that foreign eco- nomic activity plummeted further in the second quarter, notwithstanding some signs of improvement in May as restrictions started to ease. Inflation rates fell sharply across most foreign economies in April and May. The low level of oil prices relative to a year ago contributed to 12-month inflation rates close to or below zero in many advanced foreign economies (AFEs). Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, risk sentiment improved, on net, as optimism over reopening the economy, po- tential coronavirus treatments, the unexpectedly positive May employment situation report, and other indicators that suggest that economic activity may be rebounding more than offset concerns arising from otherwise dire economic data releases, warnings from health experts that openings may have been premature, and renewed tensions between the United States and China. Equity prices rose, and corporate bond spreads narrowed nota- bly. The Treasury yield curve steepened, and the market- implied expected path of the federal funds rate declined somewhat. Liquidity conditions continued to improve in general, but some stress was still evident in several markets. Financing conditions were still somewhat strained for lower-rated borrowers and small businesses even as announcements and implementation of Federal Reserve facilities during the intermeeting period were supportive of credit flows. The credit quality of busi- nesses and municipal debt weakened. The expected path of the federal funds rate for the next few years, based on a straight read of overnight index swap quotes, declined a bit and remained close to the ELB through late 2023. Market-implied forward rates referring to 2021 and 2022 turned slightly negative for a few days beginning on May 7, though market commen- tary suggested that this development did not reflect in- vestors expecting the FOMC to lower the federal funds rate target range below zero. This view was supported by Federal Reserve communications that negative inter- est rates did not appear to be an attractive policy tool. The Treasury yield curve steepened over the intermeet- ing period, with 2-year yields little changed while 10- and 30-year yields rose. Longer-term yields were likely Minutes of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ boosted by expectations of heavy upcoming Treasury se- curity issuance as well as some unwinding of safe-haven demands in connection with improved investor senti- ment. The Treasury’s first 20-year bond offering since 1986 was met with solid demand. Changes in inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities yields were mixed; 5-year inflation compensa- tion rose amid the recent partial rebound in crude oil prices, while the 5-to-10-year measure edged down. At the end of the intermeeting period, both measures stood roughly halfway between their mid-March lows and typ- ical levels seen in recent years. Broad stock price indexes moved higher. One-month implied volatility on the S&P 500 index declined some- what but still stood at the 85th percentile of its distribu- tion since 1990. investment- and Spreads on speculative-grade corporate bonds over comparable- maturity Treasury yields narrowed considerably but re- mained at levels similar to those in other periods of no- table economic or bond market stress, though well be- low financial crisis levels. Over the intermeeting period, financial market function- ing appeared to improve in general, although progress was uneven. Liquidity measures improved in the Treas- ury market, but off-the-run Treasury securities of all ten- ors and longer-maturity on-the-run securities remained less liquid than before the onset of the pandemic. Agency MBS market functioning had largely recovered, except for some less liquid parts of the market. Corpo- rate bond market liquidity improved considerably but re- mained somewhat strained, particularly for speculative- grade bonds. Liquidity in the municipal bond markets was still below pre-pandemic levels. Conditions in unsecured short-term funding markets continued to improve over the intermeeting period, and spreads on most types of commercial paper and negotia- ble certificates of deposit narrowed to levels that ap- proached pre-pandemic ranges. Amid better market conditions, take-up in the emergency liquidity facilities declined substantially. Heavy demand for Treasury bills from money market funds held down rates despite an unprecedented pace of issuance. The effective federal funds rate was 5 basis points almost every day over the intermeeting period, and the Secured Overnight Financ- ing Rate averaged 4 basis points. Total outstanding Fed- eral Reserve repos averaged about $170 billion. Amid improving market functioning, Federal Reserve pur- chases of Treasury securities and agency MBS were re- duced from around $10 billion and $8 billion per day, respectively, to $4 billion and $4.5 billion per day, re- spectively, over the intermeeting period. Risk sentiment in foreign financial markets improved over the intermeeting period. Further monetary policy and fiscal policy support in foreign countries, the easing of coronavirus-related restrictions, and a stronger-than- expected U.S. May employment report outweighed con- cerns about otherwise weak global economic data and the resurgence of U.S.–China tensions. Liquidity in global dollar funding markets continued to improve, helped in part by the Federal Reserve’s liquidity pro- grams, and prices of foreign risky assets increased. In the AFEs, option-implied volatility measures declined and long-term sovereign bond yields rose moderately, while fiscal stimulus in Japan and Europe boosted prices in their respective equity markets. Euro-area peripheral bond spreads narrowed after the European Commission proposed that the European Union be given the author- ity to borrow €750 billion to assist the recovery and the European Central Bank (ECB) increased the size of its Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme. In emerg- ing markets, the rise in oil prices since late April and overall improvements in investor sentiment boosted as- set prices, even as the coronavirus outbreak worsened in some countries. Outflows from emerging market funds slowed and then turned into small inflows later in the period. The improving risk sentiment also supported several foreign currencies, and the staff’s broad dollar index fell. The euro appreciated notably over the period, lifted in part by the European fiscal and monetary policy com- munications. The recent rebound in oil prices contrib- uted to a strong appreciation of the Canadian dollar, the Brazilian real, and the Mexican peso. Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms eased some- what over the intermeeting period, though they re- mained moderately strained for lower-rated borrowers. Investment-grade corporate bond issuance soared to record levels in April and remained robust in May, as is- suers took advantage of more favorable market condi- tions following Federal Reserve announcements of two facilities to support corporate credit markets. Regarding these facilities, the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility began in mid-May to purchase exchange-traded funds whose investment objective is to provide broad exposure to the market for U.S. corporate bonds. Speculative-grade corporate bond issuance picked up considerably toward the end of April from very low lev- els, though it slowed somewhat in May. Commercial and industrial loans on banks’ books surged again in April, Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ largely driven by lending through the Paycheck Protec- tion Program (PPP), especially at smaller banks. Credit- line drawdowns continued in April and May, though drawdowns by large firms slowed considerably from rec- ord levels in March. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations contin- ued to deteriorate sharply during the intermeeting pe- riod. The volume of nonfinancial corporate bond and leveraged loan downgrades remained very high in April and May. Defaults in corporate bonds and leveraged loans increased as well; market analysts projected de- faults to increase considerably over the remainder of 2020 and into 2021. Financing conditions for small businesses tightened amid widespread continued pandemic-related closures and reduced operations of small businesses. Lenders in- dicated that they had tightened loan standards on small business loans or discontinued lending to such borrow- ers altogether (other than PPP loans). Financing condi- tions for state and local governments improved moder- ately following several Federal Reserve announcements to support the municipal debt market, but conditions re- mained somewhat strained for lower-rated states and municipalities. In the first week of June, the State of Il- linois became the first to use the Municipal Liquidity Fa- cility. Commercial real estate (CRE) lending conditions recov- ered somewhat during the intermeeting period. Spreads on triple-A-rated and triple-B-rated non-agency CMBS declined in May but remained elevated relative to before the pandemic, and issuance showed signs of recovery in late April and early May. Federal Reserve purchases of agency CMBS reportedly helped return spreads on these securities to their pre-pandemic levels, and issuance in that market continued to be strong. However, early signs of credit repayment difficulties emerged in some CRE sectors. The volume of mortgage rate locks for home-purchase loans picked up in mid-May following a material drop in April. Financing conditions remained tight for borrow- ers with relatively low credit scores and for those seeking nonconforming mortgages. In addition, options for home equity extraction continued to be restricted, as credit for both home equity lines of credit and cash-out refinances was limited. Servicers were able to handle the liquidity strains imposed by forbearance. The sharp decline in economic activity had also curtailed the demand for consumer credit. On balance, consumer credit financing conditions did not appear to be a major drag on household spending. Issuance of consumer asset-backed securities resumed in mid-April and in early May but remained significantly below pre-pandemic lev- els. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for the U.S. economy prepared by the staff for the June FOMC meeting was downgraded, on balance, as compared with the April meeting forecast in response to information on the spread of the corona- virus and changes in the measures undertaken to contain it both at home and abroad, along with incoming eco- nomic data. U.S. real GDP was forecast to show a his- torically large decline in the second quarter of this year, and the unemployment rate was expected to be sharply higher than in the first quarter. The substantial fiscal policy measures and appreciable support from monetary policy, along with the Federal Reserve’s liquidity and lending facilities, were expected to help mitigate the de- terioration in current economic conditions and to help boost the recovery. The staff continued to judge that the future performance of the economy would depend importantly on the evo- lution of the coronavirus outbreak and the measures un- dertaken to contain it. Under the staff’s baseline as- sumptions that the current restrictions on social interac- tions and business operations would continue to ease gradually this year, real GDP was forecast to rise appre- ciably and the unemployment rate to decline considera- bly in the second half of the year, although a complete recovery was not expected by year-end. Inflation was projected to weaken this year, reflecting both the deteri- oration in resource utilization and sizable expected de- clines in consumer energy prices. Under the baseline as- sumptions, economic conditions were projected to con- tinue to improve, and inflation to pick back up, over the next two years. The staff still observed that the uncertainty related to the economic effects of the coronavirus pandemic was ex- tremely elevated and that the historical behavior of the U.S. economy in response to past economic shocks pro- vided limited guidance for making judgments about how the economy might evolve in the future. In light of the significant uncertainty and downside risks associated with the pandemic, including how much the economy would weaken and how long it would take to recover, the staff judged that a more pessimistic projection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast. In this sce- nario, a second wave of the coronavirus outbreak, with another round of strict limitations on social interactions and business operations, was assumed to begin later this Minutes of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ year, leading to a decrease in real GDP, a jump in the unemployment rate, and renewed downward pressure on inflation next year. Compared with the baseline, the disruption to economic activity was more severe and protracted in this scenario, with real GDP and inflation lower and the unemployment rate higher by the end of the medium-term projection. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2020 through 2022 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of ap- propriate monetary policy—including the path for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections repre- sented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. These projections are described in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is an addendum to these minutes. Participants noted that the coronavirus outbreak was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. The vi- rus and the measures taken to protect public health in- duced sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job losses. Weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. Fi- nancial conditions had improved, in part reflecting pol- icy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Participants agreed that lowering the federal funds rate to its ELB had established more accommodative finan- cial conditions and that the Federal Reserve’s ongoing purchases of sizable quantities of Treasury securities and agency MBS had helped restore smooth market func- tioning to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The fiscal response to economic developments had been large and timely and was providing much needed support for economic activity. Credit flows and economic activity were also being supported by the lending facilities established un- der the authority of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury. Participants judged that the effects of the coronavirus outbreak and the ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and would pose considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. Partici- pants agreed that the data for the second quarter would likely show the largest decline in economic activity in post–World War II history. Based in part on infor- mation from their Districts, participants observed that the burdens of the present crisis were not falling equally on all Americans and noted that the rise in joblessness was especially severe for lower-wage workers, women, African Americans, and Hispanics. Participants agreed that recently enacted fiscal policy programs had been de- livering valuable direct financial aid to households, busi- nesses, and communities, as well as providing relief to disadvantaged groups. Regarding household spending, participants pointed to information from District contacts, to surveys of con- sumer behavior, and to high-frequency indicators—such as credit card transactions, automated teller machine vis- its, and cellphone data tracking—as suggesting that con- sumer expenditures may be stabilizing or rebounding modestly. Limited available sources of standard eco- nomic data, such as retail purchases and motor vehicle sales, also seemed in line with this impression. With sup- portive monetary policy and payments to households under the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act), including enhanced unemploy- ment insurance payments, participants expected per- sonal consumption expenditures to grow strongly in the second half of the year, albeit from very low levels. However, the recovery in consumer spending was not expected to be particularly rapid beyond this year, with voluntary social distancing, precautionary saving, and lower levels of employment and income restraining the pace of expansion over the medium term. Participants noted that levels of uncertainty and risks perceived by businesses remained high and that these factors continued to contribute to restraints on capital expenditures, despite easing in financing conditions stemming in part from recent policy measures. Some business contacts pointed to halting improvements in consumer demand, a dearth in public infrastructure pro- jects due to strained state and local government budget conditions, or the decline in energy prices as factors likely to depress business spending. Some participants also noted reports of firms stating that they have had some challenges in rehiring employees, in part related to temporary enhanced unemployment insurance benefits. Participants generally agreed that practices and develop- ments in public health to address the pandemic would be critical for ensuring a strong and lasting reopening of businesses and reducing the likelihood of an outsized wave of closures, but monetary policy and, especially, Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ fiscal policy would play important roles. Nevertheless, participants concluded that voluntary social distancing and structural shifts stemming from the pandemic would likely mean that some proportion of businesses would close permanently. Noting ongoing changes in the com- position of production and the processes by which pro- duction takes place, participants suggested that some business adaptations were likely to endure long after the coronavirus subsides, resulting in notable dislocation and sectoral reallocation of firms and workers across in- dustries. Participants noted that conditions in the energy sector remained difficult amid still-low oil prices. Several par- ticipants anticipated continued low drilling activity, at least until excess inventories were reduced later this year, and expressed concern that a wave of bankruptcies in the energy sector could be forthcoming. In addition, the agricultural sector continued to be under stress due to low prices for some farm commodities, reduced ethanol production, and pandemic-related limitations on pro- duction for some food processing plants. With regard to the labor market, participants remarked on the surprisingly positive news from the labor market report for May but emphasized that nearly 20 million jobs had been lost, on net, since February. Participants noted that because of misclassification errors in the Cur- rent Population Survey, the official unemployment rate for May likely understated the extent of unemployment; others observed that government reliance on unemploy- ment insurance as a vehicle for income support under the CARES Act complicates the interpretation of the data. Participants also noted that unemployment insur- ance claims continued to run at a historically elevated level, but the proportion of laid-off workers who ex- pected to be recalled was unusually large. Taken to- gether, the data suggested that April could turn out to be the trough of the recession, but participants agreed that it was too early to draw any firm conclusions. Prospects for further substantial improvement in the la- bor market were seen as depending on a sustained reo- pening of the economy, which in turn depended in large part on the efficacy of health measures taken to limit the effects of the coronavirus. On this issue, participants judged there to be a great deal of uncertainty and ex- pressed concerns about the possibility that an early reo- pening would contribute to a significant increase of in- fections. Participants also regarded highly accommoda- tive monetary policy and sustained support from fiscal policy as likely to be needed to facilitate a durable recov- ery in labor market conditions. Overall, participants ex- pected that a full recovery in employment would take some time. With regard to inflation, participants reiterated their view that the negative effect from the pandemic on ag- gregate demand was likely to more than offset any up- ward pressure from supply constraints so that the overall effect of the outbreak on prices was seen as disinflation- ary. Consistent with that interpretation, participants ob- served the recent negative readings on the monthly CPI and noted that they anticipated that the 12-month PCE inflation measure would likely run well below the Com- mittee’s 2 percent objective for some time. Observing that inflation had been running somewhat below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective before the coronavirus outbreak, some participants noted a risk that long-term inflation expectations might deteriorate. Participants noted that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy would likely be needed for some time to achieve the 2 percent inflation objective over the longer run. Participants commented that there remained an extraor- dinary amount of uncertainty and considerable risks to the economic outlook. Participants shared views on possible outcomes for the reopening of the economy, the prospects for effective voluntary social distancing, and the efficacy of public health initiatives for their im- plications for economic activity and employment. A number of participants judged that there was a substan- tial likelihood of additional waves of outbreaks, which, in some scenarios, could result in further economic dis- ruptions and possibly a protracted period of reduced economic activity. Other possibilities included eco- nomic activity that might recover more quickly if sizable, widespread outbreaks could be avoided even as house- holds and businesses relax or modify social-distancing behaviors. Among the other sources of risk noted by participants were that fiscal support for households, businesses, and state and local governments might prove to be insufficient and that foreign economies could come under greater pressure than anticipated as a result of the spread of the pandemic abroad. Participants stressed that measures taken in the areas of health-care policy and fiscal policy, together with actions by house- holds and businesses, would shape the prospects for a prompt and timely return of the U.S. economy to more normal conditions. In addition, participants agreed that recent actions taken by the Federal Reserve had helped reduce risks to the economic outlook. Minutes of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ As part of their discussions of longer-run risks, partici- pants noted that in some adverse scenarios, more busi- ness closures would occur, and workers would experi- ence longer spells of unemployment that could lead to a loss of skills that could impair their employment pro- spects. In addition, to the extent that transmission- mitigation procedures adopted by firms reduced their productivity, or if the reallocation of industry output re- sulted in a lasting reduction in business investment, the longer-run level of potential output could be reduced. Regarding developments in financial markets, partici- pants agreed that ongoing actions by the Federal Re- serve, including those undertaken in collaboration with the Treasury, had helped ease strains in some financial markets and supported the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities. Measures of market func- tioning in the markets for Treasury securities and agency MBS had improved substantially since March. Strains in short-term funding markets had receded as well, and the volume of borrowing at many of the Federal Reserve’s liquidity facilities had moved lower as borrowers re- turned to market sources of funding. Risk spreads across a range of fixed-income markets had narrowed as the intense flight to safety witnessed in financial markets in the spring ebbed further. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed that the Federal Reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promot- ing its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. In light of their assessment that the ongoing public health crisis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook over the me- dium term, all participants judged that it would be ap- propriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. Keeping the target range at the ELB would continue to provide support to the economy and promote the Committee’s maximum- employment and price-stability goals. Participants also judged that it would be appropriate to maintain the tar- get range for the federal funds rate at its present level until policymakers were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the Committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Participants also agreed that, to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, over coming months it would be appropriate for the Federal Reserve to increase its holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS and agency CMBS at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering ef- fective transmission of monetary policy to broader fi- nancial conditions. In addition, the Desk would con- tinue to offer large-scale overnight and term repo oper- ations. Participants noted that it would be important to continue to monitor developments closely and that the Committee would be prepared to adjust its plans as ap- propriate. Participants also commented that the lending facilities established by the Federal Reserve under the authority of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act were sup- porting financial market functioning and the flow of credit to households, businesses of all sizes, and state and local governments. Several participants commented further that it would be important for the Federal Re- serve to remain ready to adjust these emergency lending facilities as appropriate based on its monitoring of finan- cial market functioning and credit conditions. Participants agreed that the current stance of monetary policy remained appropriate, but many noted that the Committee could, at upcoming meetings, further clarify its intentions with respect to its future monetary policy decisions as the economic outlook becomes clearer. In particular, most participants commented that the Com- mittee should communicate a more explicit form of for- ward guidance for the path of the federal funds rate and provide more clarity regarding purchases of Treasury se- curities and agency MBS as more information about the trajectory of the economy becomes available. A number of participants judged that it was important for forward guidance and asset purchases to be structured in a way that provides the accommodation necessary to support rapid economic recovery and fosters a durable return of inflation and inflation expectations to levels consistent with the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. Many participants remarked that the completion of the monetary policy framework review, together with the announcement of the conclusions arising from the re- view and the release of a revised Committee statement on its goals and policy strategy, would help clarify further how the Committee intends to conduct monetary policy going forward. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the coronavirus outbreak was caus- ing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. The virus and the measures taken to protect public health had induced sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ losses. Consumer price inflation was being held down by weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices. Fi- nancial conditions had improved, in part reflecting pol- icy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households, businesses, and communities. Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was commit- ted to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Members further concurred that the ongoing public health crisis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable downside risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. In light of these developments, members decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. Members noted that they expected to maintain this target range until they were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the Committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Members agreed that they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the eco- nomic outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global developments and muted infla- tion pressures, and would use the Committee’s tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. In determin- ing the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, members noted that they would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum-employment ob- jective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market condi- tions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and readings on financial and international developments. To support the flow of credit to households and busi- nesses, members agreed that over coming months it would be appropriate for the Federal Reserve to increase its holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS and agency CMBS at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. In addition, the Desk would continue to of- fer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. Members agreed that they would closely monitor devel- opments and be prepared to adjust their plans as appro- priate. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective June 11, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to:   Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. Increase the System Open Market Account holdings of Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and agency commercial mortgage-backed secu- rities (CMBS) at least at the current pace to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions.  Conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar fund- ing markets.  Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-counter- party limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS and all principal payments from holdings of agency CMBS in agency CMBS.  Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. Minutes of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The coronavirus outbreak is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. The virus and the measures taken to protect public health have induced sharp declines in economic activ- ity and a surge in job losses. Weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices are holding down consumer price inflation. Financial con- ditions have improved, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considera- ble risks to the economic outlook over the me- dium term. In light of these developments, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the economy has weath- ered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information re- lated to public health, as well as global develop- ments and muted inflation pressures, and will use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of mon- etary policy, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments. To support the flow of credit to households and businesses, over coming months the Federal Reserve will increase its holdings of Treasury se- curities and agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities at least at the cur- rent pace to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. In addition, the Open Market Desk will con- tinue to offer large-scale overnight and term re- purchase agreement operations. The Commit- tee will closely monitor developments and is prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. The Board of Governors also voted unan- imously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective June 11, 2020. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 28–29, 2020. The meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on June 10, 2020. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on May 19, 2020, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on April 28–29, 2020. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- tee (FOMC) meeting held on June 9–10, 2020, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2020 to 2022 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—includ- ing a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to af- fect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the ab- sence of further shocks to the economy.1 “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster out- comes for economic activity and inflation that best sat- isfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. The current projections for real activity, the labor mar- ket, and inflation were substantially weaker than the pro- jections in the December 2019 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) because participants revised their eco- nomic outlook in light of the effects of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and the measures taken to con- tain it.2 Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections; participants’ projections in the cur- rent SEP reflected their assumptions about the course of the pandemic and actions to control its spread. All par- ticipants projected that real GDP will contract sharply in 2020 and that the unemployment rate in the final quarter of the year would be markedly higher than they had pro- jected in December. Almost all participants projected that real GDP would grow faster than their estimates of its longer-run normal growth rate in 2021 and 2022 and that the unemployment rate would decline. Participants expected that a full economic recovery would take some time, with almost all participants projecting that the un- employment rate in the final quarter of 2022 would still be above their estimates of its level in the longer run. Similarly, almost all participants projected that total in- flation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expendi- tures (PCE), would be below the FOMC’s 2 percent in- flation objective throughout the forecast period. Projec- tions for core PCE inflation, which excludes food and energy, generally followed a trajectory similar to the pro- jections for total inflation. As shown in figure 2, almost all participants indicated that their expectations regarding the evolution of the economy, relative to the Committee’s objectives of max- imum employment and 2 percent inflation, would likely warrant keeping the federal funds rate at its current level through at least the end of 2022. The median of partic- ipants’ assessments of the longer-run level for the federal funds rate was unchanged from its value in the Decem- ber SEP. Amid uncertainty about the course of the pandemic and its effects on the economy, all participants regarded the uncertainties around their projections as higher than the average over the past 20 years. In addition, a substantial majority of participants assessed the risks to their out- look for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and the risks to their unemployment rate projections as weighted to the upside. The risks to inflation projections were judged as weighted to the downside by a substantial majority of participants; no participant assessed the risks to his or her inflation outlook as weighted to the upside. The Outlook for Real GDP Growth and the Unem- ployment Rate As illustrated in figure 3.A, which shows the distribu- tions of participants’ projections for real GDP growth from 2020 to 2022 and in the longer run, all participants projected that real GDP will decline in 2020, a develop- ment that reflects the coronavirus outbreak and the measures undertaken to contain its spread. The projec- tions ranged from a decline of 10.0 percent to a decline of 4.2 percent, with the median projection being a de- crease of 6.5 percent. These projections were substan- tially weaker than those from the December SEP when real GDP was expected to expand this year at close to participants’ estimates of its longer-run rate. Current ex- 1 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. 2 The preceding SEP occurred in December 2019. Because of the extraordinary circumstances surrounding the March 2020 FOMC meeting, participants did not submit quarterly eco- nomic projections at that meeting. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, June 2020 Percent Median1 Central Tendency2 Range3 Variable 2020 2021 2022 Change in real GDP December projection Unemployment rate December projection PCE inﬂation December projection Core PCE inﬂation4 December projection Memo: Projected appropriate policy path -6.5 2.0 9.3 3.5 0.8 1.9 1.0 1.9 5.0 1.9 6.5 3.6 1.6 2.0 1.5 2.0 3.5 1.8 5.5 3.7 1.7 2.0 1.7 2.0 Longer run 1.8 1.9 4.1 4.1 2.0 2.0 2020 2021 2022 -7.6– -5.5 2.0–2.2 9.0–10.0 3.5–3.7 0.6–1.0 1.8–1.9 0.9–1.1 1.9–2.0 4.5–6.0 1.8–2.0 5.9–7.5 3.5–3.9 1.4–1.7 2.0–2.1 1.4–1.7 2.0–2.1 3.0–4.5 1.8–2.0 4.8–6.1 3.5–4.0 1.6–1.8 2.0–2.2 1.6–1.8 2.0–2.2 Longer run 1.7–2.0 1.8–2.0 4.0–4.3 3.9–4.3 2.0 2.0 2020 2021 2022 -10.0– -4.2 1.8–2.3 7.0–14.0 3.3–3.8 0.5–1.2 1.7–2.1 0.7–1.3 1.7–2.1 -1.0–7.0 1.7–2.2 4.5–12.0 3.3–4.0 1.1–2.0 1.8–2.3 1.2–2.0 1.8–2.3 2.0–6.0 1.5–2.2 4.0–8.0 3.3–4.1 1.4–2.2 1.8–2.2 1.2–2.2 1.8–2.2 Longer run 1.6–2.2 1.7–2.2 3.5–4.7 3.5–4.5 2.0 2.0 Federal funds rate December projection 0.1 1.6 0.1 1.9 0.1 2.1 2.5 2.5 0.1 1.6–1.9 0.1 1.6–2.1 0.1 1.9–2.6 2.3–2.5 2.4–2.8 0.1 1.6–1.9 0.1 1.6–2.4 0.1–1.1 1.6–2.9 2.0–3.0 2.0–3.3 Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inﬂation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inﬂation and core PCE inﬂation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. The December projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on December 10–11, 2019. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the December 10–11, 2019, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the June 9–10, 2020, meeting. No projections were submitted in conjunction with the March 2020 FOMC meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the average of the two middle projections. 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inﬂation are not collected. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2020–22 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. −10−8−6−4−20246820152016201720182019202020212022Median of projectionsCentral tendency of projectionsRange of projectionsActualPercentChange in real GDPLongerrun24681012141620152016201720182019202020212022PercentUnemployment rateLongerrun012320152016201720182019202020212022PercentPCE inflationLongerrun012320152016201720182019202020212022PercentCore PCE inflationLongerrunSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. 0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0202020212022Longer runPercentPage 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2020–22 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618 −10.0−−9.9 −9.4−−9.3 −8.8−−8.7 −8.2−−8.1 −7.6−−7.5 −7.0−−6.9 −6.4−−6.3 −5.8−−5.7 −5.2−−5.1 −4.6−−4.5 −4.0−−3.9 −3.4−−3.3 −2.8−−2.7 −2.2−−2.1 −1.6−−1.5 −1.0−−0.9 −0.4−−0.3 0.2−0.3 0.8−0.9 1.4−1.5 2.0−2.1 2.6−2.7 3.2−3.3 3.8−3.9 4.4−4.5 5.0−5.1 5.6−5.7 6.2−6.3 6.8−6.9Percent range June projectionsDecember projectionsNumber of participants202024681012141618 −10.0−−9.9 −9.4−−9.3 −8.8−−8.7 −8.2−−8.1 −7.6−−7.5 −7.0−−6.9 −6.4−−6.3 −5.8−−5.7 −5.2−−5.1 −4.6−−4.5 −4.0−−3.9 −3.4−−3.3 −2.8−−2.7 −2.2−−2.1 −1.6−−1.5 −1.0−−0.9 −0.4−−0.3 0.2−0.3 0.8−0.9 1.4−1.5 2.0−2.1 2.6−2.7 3.2−3.3 3.8−3.9 4.4−4.5 5.0−5.1 5.6−5.7 6.2−6.3 6.8−6.9Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618 −10.0−−9.9 −9.4−−9.3 −8.8−−8.7 −8.2−−8.1 −7.6−−7.5 −7.0−−6.9 −6.4−−6.3 −5.8−−5.7 −5.2−−5.1 −4.6−−4.5 −4.0−−3.9 −3.4−−3.3 −2.8−−2.7 −2.2−−2.1 −1.6−−1.5 −1.0−−0.9 −0.4−−0.3 0.2−0.3 0.8−0.9 1.4−1.5 2.0−2.1 2.6−2.7 3.2−3.3 3.8−3.9 4.4−4.5 5.0−5.1 5.6−5.7 6.2−6.3 6.8−6.9Percent rangeNumber of participants202224681012141618 −10.0−−9.9 −9.4−−9.3 −8.8−−8.7 −8.2−−8.1 −7.6−−7.5 −7.0−−6.9 −6.4−−6.3 −5.8−−5.7 −5.2−−5.1 −4.6−−4.5 −4.0−−3.9 −3.4−−3.3 −2.8−−2.7 −2.2−−2.1 −1.6−−1.5 −1.0−−0.9 −0.4−−0.3 0.2−0.3 0.8−0.9 1.4−1.5 2.0−2.1 2.6−2.7 3.2−3.3 3.8−3.9 4.4−4.5 5.0−5.1 5.6−5.7 6.2−6.3 6.8−6.9Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 5________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ pectations were generally for economic activity to re- cover during the next couple of years. Almost all partic- ipants expected that the rate of real GDP growth in 2021 and 2022 would be above their estimates of its longer- run pace, with the median projections being 5.0 percent and 3.5 percent, respectively. The distribution of esti- mates of real GDP growth in the longer run was little changed from the December SEP, although the median projection ticked down to 1.8 percent. The distributions of participants’ projections for the un- employment rate from 2020 to 2022 and in the longer run are shown in figure 3.B. Reflecting the effects of the pandemic, the projections for the unemployment rate were revised up considerably throughout the forecast period relative to the December SEP. The projections for the unemployment rate in the final quarter of this year ranged from 7.0 to 14.0 percent, with a median of 9.3 percent. For the final quarter of 2021, the projec- tions for the unemployment rate ranged from 4.5 to 12.0 percent, with the median being 6.5 percent. The width of the ranges of the forecasts for the unemploy- ment rate in the final quarters of this year and next year were 7.0 percentage points and 7.5 percentage points, re- spectively—more than three times the widest ranges for forecasts of similar horizons that were submitted from 2007 to 2009. This unusually wide range of projections highlighted the challenges of assessing the economic damage caused by the pandemic and of forecasting the recovery in the labor market. The median projection for the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2022, at 5.5 percent, was above the median estimate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment of 4.1 percent. Indeed, almost all participants who submitted longer- run projections expected that the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2022 would still be above their esti- mates of the longer-run value. Participants pointed to a number of factors to explain the persistence of labor market slack, including the continuation of voluntary so- cial distancing, unusual disruptions to labor markets, and the need for businesses to restructure supply chains and other aspects of their operations. The distribution of estimates for the longer-run unemployment rate was lit- tle changed from the December SEP. The Outlook for Inflation Figures 3.C and 3.D show the distributions of partici- pants’ projections for total and core PCE inflation from 2020 to 2022 and in the longer run. All participants re- vised down their projections for inflation in 2020 relative to their December projections. Participants expected that, in 2020, total inflation would be between 0.5 and 1.2 percent, while core inflation would be between Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Variable Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . Total consumer prices2 . . . . . 2020 ±1.3 ±0.4 ±0.7 Short-term interest rates3 . . . . ±0.7 2021 ±1.8 ±1.2 ±1.0 ±2.0 2022 ±2.0 ±1.8 ±1.0 ±2.2 NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 2000 through 2019 that were re- leased in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using His- torical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx. doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. 0.7 and 1.3 percent, with median expectations for total and core inflation of 0.8 percent and 1.0 percent, respec- tively. In the December SEP, participants had expected that total inflation would be between 1.7 and 2.3 percent in 2020. In the current SEP, almost all participants ex- pected the inflation rate to rise over the next two years. However, the vast majority of participants expected PCE price inflation in 2022 to fall short of the Commit- tee’s 2 percent inflation objective, with the median pro- jection for total PCE price inflation being 1.7 percent. Appropriate Monetary Policy The distributions of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2020 to 2022 and over the longer run are shown in figure 3.E. With substantial agreement that the unem- ployment rate would remain above its longer-run level throughout the forecast period and that inflation would run below the Committee’s objective of 2 percent, al- most all participants projected that it would be appropri- ate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent through at least the end of 2022. The median of participants’ estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate was unchanged from December at 2.50 percent, although a few participants revised down their estimates. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2020–22 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618 3.2−3.3 3.8−3.9 4.4−4.5 5.0−5.1 5.6−5.7 6.2−6.3 6.8−6.9 7.4−7.5 8.0−8.1 8.6−8.7 9.2−9.3 9.8−9.9 10.4−10.5 11.0−11.1 11.6−11.7 12.2−12.3 12.8−12.9 13.4−13.5 14.0−14.1Percent range June projectionsDecember projectionsNumber of participants202024681012141618 3.2−3.3 3.8−3.9 4.4−4.5 5.0−5.1 5.6−5.7 6.2−6.3 6.8−6.9 7.4−7.5 8.0−8.1 8.6−8.7 9.2−9.3 9.8−9.9 10.4−10.5 11.0−11.1 11.6−11.7 12.2−12.3 12.8−12.9 13.4−13.5 14.0−14.1Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618 3.2−3.3 3.8−3.9 4.4−4.5 5.0−5.1 5.6−5.7 6.2−6.3 6.8−6.9 7.4−7.5 8.0−8.1 8.6−8.7 9.2−9.3 9.8−9.9 10.4−10.5 11.0−11.1 11.6−11.7 12.2−12.3 12.8−12.9 13.4−13.5 14.0−14.1Percent rangeNumber of participants202224681012141618 3.2−3.3 3.8−3.9 4.4−4.5 5.0−5.1 5.6−5.7 6.2−6.3 6.8−6.9 7.4−7.5 8.0−8.1 8.6−8.7 9.2−9.3 9.8−9.9 10.4−10.5 11.0−11.1 11.6−11.7 12.2−12.3 12.8−12.9 13.4−13.5 14.0−14.1Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 7________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2020–22 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618 0.5−0.6 0.7−0.8 0.9−1.0 1.1−1.2 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent range June projectionsDecember projectionsNumber of participants202024681012141618 0.5−0.6 0.7−0.8 0.9−1.0 1.1−1.2 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618 0.5−0.6 0.7−0.8 0.9−1.0 1.1−1.2 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants202224681012141618 0.5−0.6 0.7−0.8 0.9−1.0 1.1−1.2 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runPage 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂation, 2020–22 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618 0.7−0.8 0.9−1.0 1.1−1.2 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent range June projectionsDecember projectionsNumber of participants202024681012141618 0.7−0.8 0.9−1.0 1.1−1.2 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618 0.7−0.8 0.9−1.0 1.1−1.2 1.3−1.4 1.5−1.6 1.7−1.8 1.9−2.0 2.1−2.2 2.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants2022Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2020–22 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618 0.13−0.37 0.38−0.62 0.63−0.87 0.88−1.12 1.13−1.37 1.38−1.62 1.63−1.87 1.88−2.12 2.13−2.37 2.38−2.62 2.63−2.87 2.88−3.12 3.13−3.37Percent range June projectionsDecember projectionsNumber of participants202024681012141618 0.13−0.37 0.38−0.62 0.63−0.87 0.88−1.12 1.13−1.37 1.38−1.62 1.63−1.87 1.88−2.12 2.13−2.37 2.38−2.62 2.63−2.87 2.88−3.12 3.13−3.37Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618 0.13−0.37 0.38−0.62 0.63−0.87 0.88−1.12 1.13−1.37 1.38−1.62 1.63−1.87 1.88−2.12 2.13−2.37 2.38−2.62 2.63−2.87 2.88−3.12 3.13−3.37Percent rangeNumber of participants202224681012141618 0.13−0.37 0.38−0.62 0.63−0.87 0.88−1.12 1.13−1.37 1.38−1.62 1.63−1.87 1.88−2.12 2.13−2.37 2.38−2.62 2.63−2.87 2.88−3.12 3.13−3.37Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runPage 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Uncertainty and Risk In assessing the appropriate path for monetary policy, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- rounding their individual economic projections relative to the average level of uncertainty over the past 20 years are shown in the panels on the left side of figure 4.3 All participants viewed the current uncertainty surrounding each of the four economic variables—real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, total PCE inflation, and core PCE inflation—as being greater than the average over the past 20 years, which is the first time this situation has occurred since the introduction of the SEP in 2007.4 Participants’ assessments of the balance of risks to their current economic projections are shown in the panels on the right side of figure 4. A substantial majority of par- ticipants judged the risks to their projections for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and the risks to their unemployment rate projections as weighted to the upside. A substantial majority of participants viewed the risks to their inflation projections as weighted to the downside; no participant assessed the risks to his or her inflation outlook as weighted to the upside. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, the course of the pandemic was generally mentioned as a key source of uncertainty. The possibilities of second waves of contagion and delays in developing a vaccine were seen as potential downside risks to the economic outlook, and faster-than- anticipated progress in responding to or treating the coronavirus were seen as potential upside risks. Partici- pants also mentioned a number of other unknowns and risk factors related to the outlook, including the extent of supply-side disruptions; possible changes in house- hold behavior; the degree to which business bankrupt- cies might cause dislocations; the extent of fiscal policy support; and possibly depressed foreign demand given the global nature of the pandemic. Several participants also expressed concerns about longer-run issues in the event of a prolonged recession, such as labor market scarring if the unemployment rate remained elevated and inflation persistently undershooting the FOMC’s 2 per- cent inflation objective. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts monetary policy in response to actual and prospective develop- ments over time in key economic variables—such as real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation— uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the fed- eral funds rate importantly reflects the uncertainties about the paths for these economic variables, along with other factors. As with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial. 3 As a reference, table 2 provides estimates of the forecast un- certainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 2000 through 2019. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of un- certainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections. 4 Previous SEP addendums to the FOMC minutes contained figures showing the median projections, along with confi- dence intervals based on historical forecast errors. Because the level of uncertainty about the economic outlook is cur- rently judged to be higher than its historical average as a result of uncertainty about the course of the coronavirus and its ef- fects on the economy, these “fan charts” have been omitted from this addendum. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4. Uncertainty and risks in economic projections 24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigher June projectionsDecember projectionsNumber of participantsUncertainty about GDP growth24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupside June projectionsDecember projectionsNumber of participantsRisks to GDP growth24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigherNumber of participantsUncertainty about the unemployment rate24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupsideNumber of participantsRisks to the unemployment rate24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigherNumber of participantsUncertainty about PCE inflation24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupsideNumber of participantsRisks to PCE inflation24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigherNumber of participantsUncertainty about core PCE inflation24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupsideNumber of participantsRisks to core PCE inflationPage 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the mem- bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discussions of mon- etary policy among policymakers and can aid public un- derstanding of the basis for policy actions. Considera- ble uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily im- perfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unfore- seen developments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic out- come as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Fed- eral Open Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considera- ble uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those pro- jections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.7 to 4.3 percent in the current year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the second year, and 1.0 to 5.0 per- cent in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.3 to 2.7 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in ta- ble 2. That is, participants judge whether each economic variable is more likely to be above or below their projec- tions of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncer- tainty is concerned with the risks associated with a partic- ular projection rather than with divergences across a num- ber of different projections. As with real activity and in- flation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncer- tainty arises primarily because each participant’s assess- ment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy de- pends importantly on the evolution of real activity and in- flation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an un- expected manner, then assessments of the appropriate set- ting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with pro- jections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of par- ticipants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of-year basis. However, the fore- cast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of June 9–10, 2020Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee July 28–29, 2020 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconfer- ence on Tuesday, July 28, 2020, at 10:00 a.m. and con- tinued on Wednesday, July 29, 2020, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Patrick Harker Robert S. Kaplan Neel Kashkari Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed,2 Michael Dotsey, Beverly Hirtle, Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Mark L.J. Wright, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Eric Belsky,3 Director, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors; Matthew J. Eichner,4 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Brian M. Doyle, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Ellen E. Meade, Chiara Scotti, and Ivan Vidangos, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Eric M. Engen and David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Edward Nelson and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David López-Salido,3 Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Paul R. Wood, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of economic developments and the outlook, and all of Wednesday’s session. 3 Attended through the discussion of the review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. 4 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Eric C. Engstrom and Christopher J. Gust,3 Deputy Michael Schetzel,6 Senior Vice President, Federal Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Luca Guerrieri, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Norman J. Morin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,4 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Brian J. Bonis and Etienne Gagnon,3 Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Viktors Stebunovs,5 Assistant Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Brett Berger,6 Adviser, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,7 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors; Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo and Kurt F. Lewis, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Marcelo Ochoa, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors James Narron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Joseph W. Gruber, Daleep Singh, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Kansas City, New York, and St. Louis, respectively 5 Attended the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. Reserve Bank of New York Eugene Amromin, Kathryn B. Chen,6 Matthew Nemeth,6 Joe Peek, and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, New York, New York, Boston, and New York, respectively Robert Lerman,6 Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Karel Mertens, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Dallas Mark Spiegel, Senior Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices Participants continued their discussion related to the on- going review of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. At this meeting, they discussed potential changes to the Com- mittee’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. Participants agreed that, in light of fun- damental changes in the economy over the past dec- ade—including generally lower levels of interest rates and persistent disinflationary pressures in the United States and abroad—and given what has been learned during the monetary policy framework review, refining the statement could be helpful in increasing the trans- parency and accountability of monetary policy. Such re- finements could also facilitate well-informed deci- sionmaking by households and businesses, and, as a re- sult, better position the Committee to meet its maxi- mum-employment and price-stability objectives. Partic- ipants noted that the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy serves as the foundation for the Committee’s policy actions and that it would be important to finalize all changes to the statement in the near future. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The System Open Market Account (SOMA) manager turned first to a review of U.S. financial market develop- ments. Over the intermeeting period, overall financial conditions eased slightly. Broad equity price indexes 6 Attended the discussion of developments in financial mar- kets and open market operations. 7 Attended Tuesday’s session only. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ were roughly flat even as concerns about the resurgence in the coronavirus (COVID-19) in the United States grew. At the same time, Treasury yields and other sov- ereign yields declined, and the U.S. dollar weakened. Overall, volatility remained subdued relative to recent periods. While the S&P 500 index was little changed, the effect of renewed outbreaks was evident in the differentiated performance across S&P industry sectors. Virus-sensi- tive sectors and firms with weaker fundamentals under- performed over the period, as they had over the broader pandemic episode. Airline and hotel share prices de- clined sharply, and share prices of banks—which faced earnings pressures from large loan loss provisions and compressed net interest margins—continued to under- perform. As the SOMA manager highlighted, the S&P 500 index has been supported by its significant share of technology firms, many of which have been relatively re- silient to virus containment measures. In contrast, smaller firms not well represented in the S&P 500 may be experiencing greater effects on their businesses due to the virus—a possibility consistent with the underper- formance of the broader Russell 2000 index over the in- termeeting period. The market-implied path of the federal funds rate shifted down modestly over the intermeeting period. The cor- responding path implied by responses to the Open Mar- ket Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants also fell, as the probabilities placed on rate hikes next year and in 2022 declined. Market pricing suggested that the federal funds rate was ex- pected to first rise above the current target range in 2024. That timing was broadly consistent with survey respond- ents’ expectations regarding the timing of the first in- crease in the target range, although the range of survey responses was wide. The SOMA manager noted that survey responses suggested that the dispersion in views about the timing of a rate increase might be related to differing views about the economic conditions that would prevail when the FOMC first lifted the target range, as survey respondents’ views about those condi- tions were also dispersed. The SOMA manager reported that market functioning across a number of market segments remained stable at significantly improved levels. In Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) markets, many mar- ket functioning indicators had returned to levels prevail- ing before the pandemic, and, as a result, purchases were conducted at the minimum pace directed by the Com- mittee. Importantly, with conditions in MBS markets continuing to stabilize, primary mortgage rates fell to historically low levels over the intermeeting period. Conditions in short-term dollar funding markets were also stable, with overnight rates close to the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate. In broader dollar funding markets, term unsecured rates and foreign exchange swap spreads were also steady. Federal Reserve repur- chase agreements (repos) outstanding fell from $185 bil- lion to zero over the intermeeting period. With the tim- ing of the overnight operations now having shifted to the afternoon when most trading activity in the repo market is complete and with minimum bid rates above the IOER rate, repo operations had been effectively po- sitioned in a backstop role for the time being. As term U.S. dollar liquidity swaps matured, the amounts out- standing fell to around $120 billion, less than a third of the peak reached in late May. In light of improved conditions across these markets, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet declined over the in- termeeting period from $7.2 trillion to $7.0 trillion. The decline was driven by the reductions in repo and U.S. dollar liquidity swaps outstanding. These reductions more than offset ongoing purchases of Treasury securi- ties and agency MBS. The manager discussed a proposal to extend the tempo- rary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements as well as the temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Mone- tary Authorities) Repo Facility through March of next year. Keeping these arrangements in place would help sustain recent improvements in global dollar funding markets and support smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury market. Under the proposal, provided that the Committee had no objections, the Chair would approve the extension of the temporary liquidity swap lines fol- lowing the meeting. The extensions of the swap and FIMA repo arrangements would be announced follow- ing this meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee voted to approve a resolution that extended through March 31, 2021, the expiration of a temporary repo facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (FIMA Repo Facil- ity).8 8 The approved FIMA Desk Resolution, which updates the March 2020 resolution with a new expiration date, is available with other Committee organizational documents at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_au- thorizations.htm. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 28–29, 2020Page 3 Secretary’s note: The Chair subsequently pro- vided approval to the Desk, following the pro- cedures in the Authorization for Foreign Cur- rency Operations, to extend the expiration of the temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines through March 31, 2021. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The coronavirus outbreak and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to have substantial ef- fects on economic activity in the United States and abroad. The information available at the time of the July 28–29 meeting suggested that U.S. economic activ- ity had picked up in May and June following sharp de- clines in March and April. Measured on a quarterly basis, however, it appeared that real gross domestic product (GDP) had decreased at a historically rapid rate in the second quarter. Labor market conditions improved con- siderably in June, but the improvements over May and June were modest relative to the substantial deteriora- tion seen in March and April. Consumer price infla- tion—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expendi- tures (PCE) through May—remained well below the rates that prevailed early in the year. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded robustly in June, as it did in May, but the gains in those two months offset only about one-third of the jobs lost in March and April. The unemployment rate moved down further to 11.1 percent, but it continued to be far above its level at the beginning of the year. The unemployment rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics de- clined, on balance, over the past two months but re- mained well above the national average. Both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-popula- tion ratio increased further in June. Initial claims for un- employment insurance benefits continued to decrease, on net, through the middle of July, but the pace of de- clines had slowed in recent weeks. In addition, weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by the Board’s staff using data provided by the payroll proces- sor ADP, along with some other high-frequency measures—such as employment at small businesses and job postings—suggested that employment gains had slowed since mid-June but likely were still strong. Total PCE price inflation was 0.5 percent over the 12 months ending in May, reflecting both weak aggre- gate demand and a considerable drop in consumer en- ergy prices. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.0 percent over the same 12-month period. In contrast, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price in- flation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dal- las was 2.0 percent in May. The consumer price index (CPI) increased 0.6 percent over the 12 months ending in June, while core CPI inflation was 1.2 percent over the same period. On a monthly basis, the available data indicated that consumer prices—as measured by the PCE price index in May and the CPI in June—had turned up after having fallen in March and April; this re- bound was evident in many price categories that were most affected by social-distancing measures. Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run infla- tion expectations were little changed on balance. The University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years was unchanged, on net, from May to early July; the three-year-ahead measure from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Con- sumer Expectations edged down in June but remained within its recent range. Real PCE rebounded robustly in May, with particularly strong growth in spending for consumer goods but more moderate gains in expenditures for consumer services. In June, the components of retail sales used by the Bu- reau of Economic Analysis to estimate PCE, along with light motor vehicle sales, increased further. Overall, however, real consumer spending remained well below the levels that prevailed at the beginning of the year. Moreover, recent high-frequency indicators of spending on many consumer services—such as restaurant dining, hotel accommodations, and air travel—remained very subdued. Real disposable personal income fell back in May, primarily reflecting the waning of the substantial boost that federal stimulus payments had provided in April. However, wage and salary income increased strongly in May, though to a level still below its February value, and unemployment insurance benefits continued to be substantial, leaving the personal saving rate quite elevated. The consumer sentiment measures from both the Michigan survey and the Conference Board survey improved notably in June but fell back somewhat in July. Housing-sector activity bounced back strongly in recent months, likely boosted in part by the effects of low in- terest rates. Starts and building permit issuance for sin- gle-family homes, along with starts of multifamily units, increased significantly over May and June; however, Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ these construction measures were still below their pre- pandemic levels. Sales of existing homes rose substan- tially over those two months, and new home sales also moved up on net. Indicators of business fixed investment suggested that investment had generally not begun to recover but that the pace of declines had moderated, on balance, in re- cent months. Nominal new orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased in May and June, but they remained below their levels at the beginning of the year, while some measures of busi- ness sentiment improved. Nominal business spending on nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector declined further in May, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indica- tor of business spending on structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to decrease through late July. Industrial production expanded briskly in May and June, as many factories reopened or ramped up production. The surge in manufacturing production was led by ap- preciable gains in the output of motor vehicles and re- lated parts following extended automaker shutdowns from mid-March through April. In contrast, output in the mining sector—which includes crude oil extrac- tion—decreased further, reflecting the effects of still- low crude oil prices. Total real government purchases appeared to have in- creased moderately, on balance, in the second quarter. Federal defense spending continued to rise through June, and nondefense purchases were likely boosted in the second quarter by fiscal policy measures taken in re- sponse to the coronavirus. In contrast, state and local purchases looked to have declined markedly, as the pay- rolls of these governments shrank further in June, and nominal state and local construction expenditures de- creased, on net, over April and May. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in May relative to April, as exports decreased more than imports. The fall in exports was broad based across goods categories, while lower imports of automotive products more than offset higher imports of consumer goods and industrial supplies. Following April’s historic plunge, exports and imports of services fell a bit further in May, driven by the continued suspension of most in- ternational travel. Preliminary data for June showed some recovery in nominal goods exports and imports. Altogether, the available data suggested that net exports were a significant drag on the rate of change in real GDP in the second quarter. Incoming data suggested that foreign economic activity plunged in the second quarter as a result of the corona- virus pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain it. There were also signs that many foreign economies started to recover over the past few months as re- strictions were gradually eased. In China, where eco- nomic activity had collapsed in the first quarter and re- strictions were rolled back earlier than elsewhere, the preliminary GDP release showed that the economy bounced back strongly in the second quarter. In the euro area and other advanced foreign economies, recent data on industrial production and, to a lesser extent, con- sumer spending showed a partial recovery in May and June. However, continued uncertainty about the course of the virus was underscored by the fact that some emerging market economies were struggling to control the pandemic, while some other countries that previ- ously contained the virus were experiencing flare-ups of new infections. Inflation rates continued to fall in most foreign economies through June because of low energy prices and weak demand, and measures of inflation ex- pectations remained subdued. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Amid sizable fluctuations, changes in asset prices over the intermeeting period were mixed on net. Financial market sentiment was boosted by better-than-expected economic data for the United States, China, and Europe. However, the boost to sentiment appeared to have been offset by concerns about the domestic spread of the coronavirus and its uncertain effects on the future course of the economy. On balance, broad equity price indexes were roughly unchanged, Treasury yields de- clined and the yield curve flattened, corporate and mu- nicipal bond spreads narrowed, and the dollar weakened somewhat. Liquidity conditions continued to normalize but had not returned to their pre-pandemic levels in sev- eral markets. Over the intermeeting period, yields on nominal Treas- ury securities fell and the yield curve flattened on net. Yields declined somewhat at the start of the intermeeting period following the more-accommodative-than-ex- pected June FOMC communications. The further de- cline in yields that occurred over subsequent weeks likely reflected concerns about the surge in confirmed corona- virus cases across many parts of the United States. Measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation Protected Securities maturing over the next few years continued to rebound from their sharp drop in mid-March. The rebound was reportedly driven primar- ily by investors’ interpretation of recent economic data, which suggested that the risk of deflation had abated _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 28–29, 2020Page 5 somewhat, as well as by some improvement in market liquidity. Despite the uptick, both the 5-year and 10-year measures of inflation compensation remained below their pre-pandemic levels. The expected path of the fed- eral funds rate based on a straight read of overnight in- dex swap quotes declined modestly and stayed close to the effective lower bound at least through the first half of 2024. Market-implied forward rates referring to 2021 and 2022 remained slightly negative; however, market commentary suggested that investors generally did not expect the FOMC to lower the federal funds target range below zero. Broad stock price indexes fluctuated substantially, largely in reaction to news about the pandemic and eco- nomic activity, and ended the intermeeting period roughly unchanged. Technology stocks continued to outperform the broader market, whereas equity prices in the bank and energy sectors fell notably over the period. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 in- dex—the VIX—rose markedly earlier in the period but subsequently declined and ended the period lower. Eq- uity market volatility remained elevated relative to its normal range over the past several years. Spreads of in- vestment- and speculative-grade corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury yields narrowed somewhat and had retraced most of their pandemic-re- lated surge. Conditions in short-term funding markets were generally stable over the intermeeting period. Spreads for nego- tiable certificates of deposit and most types of commer- cial paper were little changed, on net, and spreads and issuance volumes for both types of instruments reached pre-pandemic levels. In light of the stable market con- ditions, there was little activity in the emergency liquidity facilities. Since the June FOMC meeting, assets under management for prime money market funds (MMFs) were little changed, whereas government MMFs experi- enced moderate outflows. Amid heavy issuance of se- curities by the Treasury, government MMFs continued to increase their holdings of Treasury securities while re- ducing their holdings of repos. The effective federal funds rate (EFFR) and Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) increased, on aver- age, 4 basis points and 5 basis points, respectively, from the previous intermeeting period. The EFFR fluctuated between 8 and 10 basis points, and the SOFR fluctuated between 7 and 13 basis points, throughout the inter- meeting period. The decline in total outstanding Federal Reserve repo operations from $185 billion to zero largely reflected an increase in minimum bid rates at the Federal Reserve’s overnight and term repo operations. Over the intermeeting period, the Federal Reserve main- tained the purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS at the pace prevailing at the end of the previous intermeeting period. Risk sentiment abroad fluctuated over the intermeeting period as market participants weighed increasing coro- navirus cases in a number of countries against improving economic data releases and ongoing fiscal and monetary policy support. Foreign equity prices generally declined on net. A resurgence of geopolitical tensions between the United States and China weighed on investor senti- ment late in the period and prompted a partial retrace- ment of earlier gains for the Shanghai Composite Index. Long-term sovereign yields in most advanced foreign economies (AFEs) ended the period moderately lower. The yield spreads of long-term Italian bonds over their German counterparts narrowed further, reaching the lowest level since March following agreement on the Eu- ropean Union (EU) Recovery Fund. The staff’s broad dollar index declined slightly, on net, with moderate depreciation against AFE currencies. The EU Recovery Fund agreement supported the euro, which appreciated about 3 percent against the dollar over the intermeeting period. In contrast, the Brazilian real depreciated about 5 percent against the dollar, amid continued policy rate cuts by the Central Bank of Brazil, escalating coronavirus cases, and political turmoil in Bra- zil. Capital market financing conditions for nonfinancial firms eased somewhat further over the intermeeting pe- riod, with yields on corporate bonds remaining near his- torical lows. Investment-grade corporate bond issuance was solid in June, and speculative-grade issuance re- mained robust. Gross institutional leveraged loan issu- ance picked up in June from its subdued levels in previ- ous months. Gross equity issuance hit a record level in June, as the volume of seasoned equity offerings reached a new record, while initial public offerings rebounded from their very low levels of the previous three months. In the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported a notable tightening of lending standards on commercial and in- dustrial (C&I) loans to firms of all sizes in the second quarter. Standards were reported to be at the tighter end of their range since 2005, a marked change from a year ago. C&I loans on banks’ balance sheets contracted sig- nificantly in June, reflecting paydowns of the record draws on credit lines seen in previous months, as well as low originations. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Credit quality of nonfinancial corporations deteriorated further over the intermeeting period, with a sizable vol- ume of speculative-grade debt downgraded in June. De- faults in May reached their highest single-month volume since 2009, and June defaults were high as well. Market indicators of future default expectations also deterio- rated somewhat. Municipal market financing conditions remained accommodative, although the credit quality of municipal debt continued to show signs of weakness. Financing conditions for small businesses remained tight. Banks reported in the July SLOOS that the level of standards for small businesses was at the tighter end of the range since 2005. At the same time, the credit needs of small businesses remained high, as the prospect arose of many businesses having to shut down opera- tions again in response to rising coronavirus cases. Small business loan performance deteriorated significantly; short-term delinquencies were comparable with levels seen in early 2008. Amid tighter lending standards and high credit demand, advances via the Paycheck Protec- tion Program Lending Facility continued to grow over the intermeeting period. In early July, the Main Street Lending Program became fully operational. Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE), particularly those in capital markets, recovered further over the intermeeting period. Spreads on non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) contin- ued to decline in June, while issuance of non-agency CMBS continued to show signs of moderate recovery in May and June. Spreads on agency CMBS remained at pre-pandemic levels, and agency CMBS issuance was strong. In contrast, bank lending standards for CRE loans tightened further, according to the July SLOOS, and CRE loan growth at banks slowed. The credit qual- ity of existing CRE loans continued to deteriorate as fur- ther signs of repayment difficulties emerged, most nota- bly in the lodging and retail sectors. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were generally unchanged over the intermeeting period. The spread between the primary mortgage rate and MBS yields remained wide, reflecting capacity constraints at loan originators, increased origination costs, and de- creases in the value of servicing rights. Credit continued to flow to borrowers with higher credit scores seeking mortgages that met standard conforming loan criteria, and low mortgage interest rates supported elevated refi- nancing activity. Financing conditions remained tight, however, for borrowers with relatively low credit scores and for those seeking nonconforming mortgages. The July SLOOS and other surveys of mortgage market con- ditions suggested that both bank and nonbank lenders tightened standards in the second quarter. The credit quality of mortgages did not appear to deteriorate fur- ther over the period. Financing conditions for consumer credit tightened a bit further during the intermeeting period. In the credit card market, lending standards at commercial banks tightened further according to the July SLOOS. In con- trast, conditions in the auto loan market appeared to be little changed, on balance, with those for subprime bor- rowers remaining tight. Conditions in the consumer as- set-backed securities (ABS) markets were stable during the intermeeting period. Yield spreads for certain highly rated credit card and auto loan ABS stabilized at pre- pandemic levels, while student and auto loan ABS issu- ance recovered to a pre-pandemic pace. Consumer credit quality remained stable, partly due to forbearance programs. The staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system, and, on balance, charac- terized the financial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as notable, while noting an unusually high level of uncertainty associated with this assessment. The staff judged that asset valuation pressures were notable. In particular, high-yield and investment-grade corporate bond spreads were within historical norms, and com- mercial real estate prices were continuing to increase de- spite rising vacancy rates. The staff assessed vulnerabil- ities due to nonfinancial leverage to have risen from moderate to notable, reflecting declines in household in- comes and business profits; such declines implied less resilient borrowers. The expected sharp decline in sec- ond-quarter real GDP would likely result in a rise in the ratio of household debt to nominal GDP. The ratio of business debt to nominal GDP rose in the first quarter from levels that were already historically high—amid de- clining profits and deteriorating credit quality—although low interest rates had helped ease firms’ debt servicing burdens. The staff assessed vulnerabilities arising from financial leverage to have increased from low to moder- ate, citing uncertainty about losses connected to business loans for banks and a higher weight on vulnerabilities connected to leverage at nonbank financial institutions. Vulnerabilities associated with maturity and liquidity transformation were characterized as moderate, and the staff noted that Federal Reserve facilities reduced these vulnerabilities at nonbanks. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 28–29, 2020Page 7 Staff Economic Outlook In the U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the July FOMC meeting, the estimated level of real GDP in the second quarter was marked up compared with the June meeting forecast, reflecting the better- than-expected data through June. Nevertheless, eco- nomic activity still appeared to have declined at a histor- ically rapid rate in the second quarter. The projected rate of recovery in real GDP, and the pace of declines in the unemployment rate, over the second half of this year were expected to be somewhat less robust than in the previous forecast. Although the staff assumed that ad- ditional fiscal stimulus measures would be enacted be- yond those anticipated in the June forecast, the positive effect on the economic outlook was outweighed some- what by the staff’s assessment of the likely effects of sev- eral other factors. Those factors included the increasing spread of the coronavirus in the United States since mid- June; the reactions of many states and localities in slow- ing or scaling back the reopening of their economies, es- pecially for businesses, such as restaurants and bars, providing services that entail personal interactions; and some high-frequency indicators that pointed to a decel- eration in economic activity. Substantial fiscal policy measures—both enacted and anticipated—along with appreciable support from monetary policy and the Fed- eral Reserve’s liquidity and lending facilities were ex- pected to continue bolstering the economic recovery, although a complete recovery was not expected by year- end. Inflation was projected to remain subdued this year, reflecting the substantial amount of slack in re- source utilization and the sizable declines in consumer energy prices earlier this year. The staff’s baseline as- sumptions were that the current restrictions on social in- teractions and business operations, along with voluntary social distancing by individuals, would ease gradually through next year. As a result, the rate of real GDP growth was projected to exceed potential output growth, the unemployment rate was expected to decline consid- erably, and inflation was forecast to pick back up over 2021 and 2022. The staff continued to observe that the uncertainty re- lated to the economic effects of the pandemic was ex- tremely elevated and that the unusual nature of the pan- demic-related shock made assessments about how the economy might evolve in the future more challenging than usual. In light of the significant uncertainty and downside risks associated with the course of the pan- demic and how long it would take the economy to re- cover, the staff still judged that a more pessimistic pro- jection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast. In this alternative scenario, an acceleration of the coro- navirus outbreak, with another round of strict limita- tions on social interactions and business operations, was assumed to begin later this year, leading to a decrease in real GDP, a jump in the unemployment rate, and re- newed downward pressure on inflation next year. Com- pared with the baseline, the disruption to economic ac- tivity was more severe and protracted in this scenario, with real GDP and inflation lower and the unemploy- ment rate higher by the end of the medium-term projec- tion. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants noted that the coronavirus pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Follow- ing sharp declines, economic activity and employment had picked up somewhat in recent months but remained well below levels at the beginning of the year. Weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. Overall financial condi- tions had improved in recent months, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend on the course of the virus, which was seen as highly uncer- tain. Participants noted that the rebound in consumer spend- ing from its trough in April had been particularly strong. Resumption in economic activity, as well as payments to households under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Eco- nomic Security (CARES) Act, had supported household income and consumer expenditures. Participants ob- served that with this rebound, household spending likely had recovered about half of its previous decline. Con- sumers’ purchases of goods—including motor vehicles, other durables, and especially goods sold online—had bounced back much more than their purchases of ser- vices, such as air travel, hotel accommodations, and res- taurant meals, which were disrupted significantly by so- cial distancing and other effects of the virus. With re- gard to the behavior of household spending in recent weeks, participants pointed to information from District contacts and high-frequency indicators (such as credit and debit card transactions and mobility indicators based on cellphone location tracking) as suggesting that in- creases in some consumer expenditures had likely slowed in reaction to the further spread of the virus. Participants noted that households’ spending on discre- Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ tionary services—such as leisure, travel, and hospital- ity—would likely be subdued for some time and thus would be a factor restraining the pace of recovery. turn, such a reopening would depend in large part on the efficacy of health measures taken to limit the spread of the virus. In contrast to the sizable rebound in consumer spend- ing, participants saw less improvement in the business sector in recent months, and they noted that their Dis- trict business contacts continued to report extraordinar- ily high levels of uncertainty and risks. Several partici- pants relayed examples of some operational difficulties their business contacts were reportedly facing in the cur- rent environment. These difficulties included managing disruptions in supply chains, challenges associated with closure and reopening, and elevated employee absentee- ism in some cases. Furthermore, some participants noted that small businesses were under significant strain. Also, further near-term fiscal support was uncertain. Participants noted that, in light of conditions in the busi- ness sector, business investment spending continued to be subdued. Participants generally agreed that actions of consumers and businesses in taking steps to slow the spread of the virus, along with developments in public health, would be critical in ensuring a durable reopening of businesses. In addition, monetary policy and particu- larly fiscal policy would also play important roles in sup- porting business activity. Several participants also commented on ongoing chal- lenges facing the energy or farm sector despite recent improvements. In the energy sector, these challenges in- cluded still-low oil demand, excess inventories, and low oil prices, while in the farm sector they included low prices of some farm commodities, pandemic-related dis- ruptions in some food processing plants, and a signifi- cant decline in demand for ethanol. Regarding the labor market, many participants com- mented that the pace of employment gains, which was quite strong in May and June, had likely slowed. The increasing number of virus cases in many parts of the country had led to delays in some business reopenings and to some reclosures as well. The pace of declines in initial unemployment insurance claims had slowed in re- cent weeks, and claims remained at an elevated level. In addition, participants emphasized that the labor market was a long way from a full recovery even after the posi- tive May and June employment reports; these reports in- dicated that, through June, only about one-third of the roughly 22 million loss in jobs that occurred over March and April had been offset by subsequent gains. Partici- pants generally agreed that prospects for further sub- stantial improvement in the labor market would depend on a broad and sustained reopening of businesses. In Participants also discussed the nature of the current sit- uation in the labor market. They noted that the down- turn in employment was concentrated among lower- wage and service-sector workers, many of whom were employed in industries most adversely affected by social- distancing measures. And with lower-wage and service- sector jobs disproportionately held by African Ameri- cans, Hispanics, and women, these portions of the pop- ulation were bearing a disproportionate share of the eco- nomic hardship caused by the pandemic. Participants noted that the fiscal support initiated in the spring through the CARES Act had been very important in granting some financial relief to millions of families. A number of participants observed that, with some provi- sions of the CARES Act set to expire shortly against the backdrop of a still-weak labor market, additional fiscal aid would likely be important for supporting vulnerable families, and thus the economy more broadly, in the pe- riod ahead. In their comments about inflation, participants generally judged that the negative effect of the pandemic on ag- gregate demand was more than offsetting upward pres- sures on some prices stemming from supply constraints or from higher demand for certain products, so that the overall effect of the pandemic on prices was seen as dis- inflationary. Recent low monthly readings of PCE prices suggested that the 12-month change measure of PCE price inflation would likely continue to run well below the Committee’s 2 percent objective for some time. Against this backdrop, a few participants noted a risk that longer-term inflation expectations might move be- low levels consistent with the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. Participants also noted that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy would likely be needed for some time to support aggregate demand and achieve 2 percent inflation over the longer run. Participants observed that many measures of financial market functioning were indicating that improvements achieved since the extreme turbulence in March had been sustained. Actions by the Federal Reserve, includ- ing emergency lending facilities established with ap- proval of (and, in many cases, financial support from) the Treasury, had helped ease the strains in some finan- cial markets seen earlier in the year and were supporting the flow of credit to households, businesses, and com- munities. Participants observed that the volume of bor- _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 28–29, 2020Page 9 rowing in recent months at many of the Federal Re- serve’s liquidity facilities had stayed low, reflecting im- proved availability of funding from market sources. And participants agreed that the Federal Reserve’s ongoing provision of backstop credit in various forms continued to be important to sustain the market improvements al- ready achieved. Participants observed that uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook remained very elevated, with the path of the economy highly dependent on the course of the virus and the public sector’s response to it. Several risks to the outlook were noted, including the possibility that additional waves of virus outbreaks could result in ex- tended economic disruptions and a protracted period of reduced economic activity. In such scenarios, banks and other lenders could tighten conditions in credit markets appreciably and restrain the availability of credit to households and businesses. Other risks cited included the possibility that fiscal support for households, busi- nesses, and state and local governments might not pro- vide sufficient relief of financial strains in these sectors and that some foreign economies could come under greater pressure than anticipated as a result of the spread of the pandemic abroad. Several participants noted po- tential longer-run effects of the pandemic associated with possible restructuring in some sectors of the econ- omy that could slow the growth of the economy’s pro- ductive capacity for some time. A number of participants commented on various poten- tial risks to financial stability. Banks and other financial institutions could come under significant stress, particu- larly if one of the more adverse scenarios regarding the spread of the virus and its effects on economic activity was realized. Nonfinancial corporations had carried high levels of indebtedness into the pandemic, increas- ing their risk of insolvency. There were also concerns that the anticipated increase in Treasury debt over the next few years could have implications for market func- tioning. There was general agreement that these institu- tions, activities, and markets should be monitored closely, and a few participants noted that improved data would be helpful for doing so. Several participants ob- served that the Federal Reserve had recently taken steps to help ensure that banks remain resilient through the pandemic, including by conducting additional sensitivity analysis in conjunction with the most recent bank stress tests and imposing temporary restrictions on share- holder payouts to preserve banks’ capital. A couple of participants noted that they believed that restrictions on shareholder payouts should be extended, while another judged that such a step would be premature. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed their commitment to using the Federal Reserve’s full range of tools to support the U.S. economy during this challenging time, thereby promot- ing its maximum employment and price stability goals. They noted that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus and that the on- going public health crisis would weigh heavily on eco- nomic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic out- look over the medium term. In light of this assessment, all participants considered it appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. Furthermore, participants continued to judge that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until they were confident that the economy had weathered re- cent events and was on track to achieve the Committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. Participants also judged that, in order to continue to sup- port the flow of credit to households and businesses, it would be appropriate over coming months for the Fed- eral Reserve to increase its holdings of Treasury securi- ties and agency residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) and CMBS at least at the current pace. These actions would be helpful in sustaining smooth market functioning, thereby fostering the effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. In addition, participants noted that it was appropriate that the Desk would continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. Participants observed that it would be important to continue to monitor develop- ments closely and that the Committee would be pre- pared to adjust its plans as appropriate. Participants discussed the current stance of monetary policy and the circumstances under which they might in- crease monetary policy accommodation or clarify their intentions regarding policy. Participants generally judged that the Committee’s policy actions over the past several months had provided substantial accommoda- tion; several of them observed that the Committee’s as- set purchases, which were designed to support financial market functioning and the smooth flow of credit, were likely also providing a degree of policy accommodation. Noting the increase in uncertainty about the economic outlook over the intermeeting period, several partici- pants suggested that additional accommodation could be required to promote economic recovery and return in- flation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Some participants observed that, due to the nature of the shock that the U.S. economy was experiencing, strong Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ fiscal policy support would be necessary to encourage expeditious improvements in labor market conditions. With regard to the outlook for monetary policy beyond this meeting, a number of participants noted that provid- ing greater clarity regarding the likely path of the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate at some point. Concerning the possible form that revised policy communications might take, these participants commented on outcome-based forward guidance—un- der which the Committee would undertake to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at least until one or more specified economic outcomes was achieved—and also touched on calendar-based forward guidance—under which the current target range would be maintained at least until a particular calendar date. In the context of outcome-based forward guidance, various participants mentioned using thresholds calibrated to in- flation outcomes, unemployment rate outcomes, or combinations of the two, as well as combinations with calendar-based guidance. In addition, many participants commented that it might become appropriate to frame communications regarding the Committee’s ongoing as- set purchases more in terms of their role in fostering ac- commodative financial conditions and supporting eco- nomic recovery. More broadly, in discussing the policy outlook, a number of participants observed that com- pleting a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy would be very helpful in providing an overarching framework that would help guide the Committee’s future policy actions and com- munications. A majority of participants commented on yield caps and targets—approaches that cap or target interest rates along the yield curve—as a monetary policy tool. Of those participants who discussed this option, most judged that yield caps and targets would likely provide only modest benefits in the current environment, as the Committee’s forward guidance regarding the path of the federal funds rate already appeared highly credible and longer-term interest rates were already low. Many of these participants also pointed to potential costs associ- ated with yield caps and targets. Among these costs, par- ticipants noted the possibility of an excessively rapid ex- pansion of the balance sheet and difficulties in the design and communication of the conditions under which such a policy would be terminated, especially in conjunction with forward guidance regarding the policy rate. In light of these concerns, many participants judged that yield caps and targets were not warranted in the current envi- ronment but should remain an option that the Commit- tee could reassess in the future if circumstances changed markedly. A couple of participants remarked on the value of yield caps and targets as a means of reinforcing forward guidance on asset purchases, thereby providing insurance against adverse movements in market expec- tations regarding the path of monetary policy, and as a tool that could help limit the amount of asset purchases that the Committee would need to make in pursuing its dual-mandate goals. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the coronavirus outbreak was caus- ing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Following sharp declines, economic activity and employment had picked up somewhat in recent months but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year. Con- sumer price inflation was being held down by weaker de- mand and significantly lower oil prices. Overall financial conditions had improved, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households, businesses, and communities. Mem- bers agreed that the Federal Reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. Members stated that the path of the economy would de- pend significantly on the course of the virus. In addi- tion, members agreed that the ongoing public health cri- sis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employ- ment, and inflation in the near term and was posing con- siderable risks to the economic outlook over the me- dium term. In light of these developments, members decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. Members stated that they ex- pected to maintain this target range until they were con- fident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the Committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. Members agreed that they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the eco- nomic outlook—including information related to public health—as well as global developments and muted infla- tion pressures, and that they would use the Committee’s tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, members noted that they would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum-employment ob- jective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. This assessment would take into account a wide range of _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 28–29, 2020Page 11 information, including measures of labor market condi- tions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and readings on financial and international developments. To support the flow of credit to households and busi- nesses, members agreed that over coming months it would be appropriate for the Federal Reserve to increase its holdings of Treasury securities and agency RMBS and CMBS at least at the current pace to sustain smooth mar- ket functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. In addition, members agreed that the Desk would continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. Members noted that they would closely monitor devel- opments and be prepared to adjust their plans as appro- priate. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective July 30, 2020, the Federal Open Mar- ket Committee directs the Desk to: • • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. Increase the System Open Market Account holdings of Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and agency commercial mortgage-backed secu- rities (CMBS) at least at the current pace to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. • Conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar fund- ing markets. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-counter- party limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS and all principal payments from holdings of agency CMBS in agency CMBS. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. The coronavirus outbreak is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Following sharp declines, economic activity and employ- ment have picked up somewhat in recent months but remain well below their levels at the beginning of the year. Weaker demand and sig- nificantly lower oil prices are holding down con- sumer price inflation. Overall financial condi- tions have improved in recent months, in part reflecting policy measures to support the econ- omy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The path of the economy will depend signifi- cantly on the course of the virus. The ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on eco- nomic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. In light of these developments, the Committee de- cided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the economy has weathered re- cent events and is on track to achieve its maxi- mum employment and price stability goals. The Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information re- lated to public health, as well as global develop- ments and muted inflation pressures, and will use its tools and act as appropriate to support Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the economy. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of mon- etary policy, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its sym- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- sessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor mar- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on fi- nancial and international developments. To support the flow of credit to households and businesses, over coming months the Federal Reserve will increase its holdings of Treasury se- curities and agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities at least at the cur- rent pace to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. In addition, the Open Market Desk will con- tinue to offer large-scale overnight and term re- purchase agreement operations. The Commit- tee will closely monitor developments and is prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. The Board of Governors also voted unan- imously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective July 30, 2020. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, Septem- ber 15–16, 2020. The meeting adjourned at 10:55 a.m. on July 29, 2020. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on June 30, 2020, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on June 9–10, 2020. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 28–29, 2020Page 13 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee September 15–16, 2020 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconference on Tuesday, September 15, 2020, at 11:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, September 16, 2020, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Patrick Harker Robert S. Kaplan Neel Kashkari Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Sally Davies and Brian M. Doyle, Deputy Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Ellen E. Meade, Chiara Scotti, and Ivan Vidangos, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors David Bowman, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Eric M. Engen, Diana Hancock, and John J. Stevens, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed, Michael Dotsey, Marc Giannoni, Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Mark L.J. Wright, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account and Statistics, Board of Governors Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; David López-Salido, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Christopher J. Gust, Deputy Associate Director, Board of Governors Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; John M. Roberts, Deputy Associate Director, 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Brian J. Bonis and Laura Lipscomb, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors; Dana L. Burnett and Felicia Ionescu, Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Mark A. Carlson, Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo, Jonathan E. Goldberg, and Kurt F. Lewis, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Meredith Black, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Joseph W. Gruber, Sylvain Leduc, Anna Paulson, Daleep Singh, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Kansas City, San Francisco, Chicago, New York, and St. Louis, respectively Argia M. Sbordone and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Jenny Tang, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Opening Remarks The Chair, Vice Chair Williams, and Governor Clarida opened the meeting with remarks in memory of Thomas Laubach. 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. Chair Powell: “Thomas was unquestionably one of the great economic minds of his generation, and his re- search has been central to some of our biggest discussions and policy actions over the past sev- eral years. He had a rare and underappreciated gift for translating arcane and academic theory into real world practice. That ability made a real difference in the conduct and communication of monetary policy. From his work on r*, to the balance sheet, to leading the steering committee for our monetary policy review, Thomas Lau- bach’s intellectual fingerprints are all over the Committee’s decisions that will define this era of the Federal Reserve. Thomas was also an exceptional colleague, leader, and friend. No one here will be sur- prised to know that as condolences pour in, the admiration for his kindness and equanimity match, if not exceed, the esteem for his intellect. Thomas was a model of leadership who fiercely believed that every member of his team is criti- cal to our collective success, and he made cer- tain they knew it. Even as he battled his own health problems, working through treatment to help fight the economic fallout of a global pan- demic, his concern lay with others. Amid a del- uge of emergency work to fight a historic down- turn and the upending of daily life, Thomas urged people to take care of themselves and their families first. It is a testament to the mu- tual respect and amity that it was Thomas’s team who proposed the Tealbook dedication in his memory. As friends, colleagues, and collaborators, we all grieve his loss. His absence leaves a space that cannot truly be filled. We will miss Thomas Laubach’s intellect and his insight. More im- portantly, we will miss Thomas Laubach.” Vice Chair Williams: “Thomas and I started working together 20 years ago. He had just arrived at the Board from the Kansas City Fed, and I had returned from my stint at the Council of Economic Ad- visers. And it was truly serendipitous. We im- mediately recognized the shared interest in fig- uring out how to estimate this thing called the Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ natural rate of interest. And more importantly, Thomas was an expert in Kalman filtering. So we were off to the races on that project. Ironi- cally, given subsequent events, the question of the time was whether the productivity boom had driven r* higher. In fact, if you go back to our December 2000 memo, our first memo to the Board on r*, our original estimates had r* at 4¼ percent, and that’s real, not nominal. So that’s a 6¼ percent nominal r*. Those were the days. Jumping ahead 15 years, following his appoint- ment as Director of Monetary Affairs, Thomas would frequently, and very earnestly, ask me how he could be most effective in his role as an adviser to the FOMC. And I’d remind him that the Committee has at times been compared to a herd of cats. But he was always looking for ways to raise his game, and hopefully ours, and help the Committee grapple with issues and de- cisions before us. Sometimes that effort led to briefings with a labyrinth of charts and figures, where Thomas heroically tried to make sense of our Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) projections and the implicit policy rule that must be embedded in them if you only looked hard enough. Or it goes without saying how everything makes more sense once you factor in r*. His role as trusted adviser was never more on display or important than during the framework just commented. review as Chair Powell Thomas focused on making sure the Commit- tee was prepared with the very best information and analysis. He consistently moved us towards the goal line, even as he engaged in a complex range of issues and dealt with the effects of the pandemic. And he scrupulously played the role of honest broker throughout. Indeed, he per- fected the formula for herding cats. It’s one part keen intellect, a dollop of understated hu- mor, and a big helping of patience and persever- ance.” Governor Clarida: “Thomas Laubach was a remarkable human be- ing who just happened to be a world class econ- omist. His passing last week represents of course an incalculable loss for his family, but is also a devastating blow felt by each and every one of us in the Federal Reserve System, and indeed, in major central banks around the world that he frequently visited. Before I arrived at the Board, I knew Thomas primarily through his research. His book on in- flation targeting with Ben Bernanke, Rick Mish- kin, and Adam Posen is a classic reference on the subject, as is his work with President Wil- liams on r*. I would say Thomas had a talent for picking co-authors. Thomas and I first met when he was a Ph.D. student working on the book and we were both visiting the New York Fed. I remember well our first meeting 25 years ago, and I was struck then by Thomas’s enthusiasm that he brought to economics as a graduate stu- dent. Thomas of course never lost that spark and joy for the practice of monetary policy, and we are all fortunate that he did not. I—and I’m sure Chair Powell, and before him, Chair Yellen—trusted him implicitly. And speaking for myself, I always sought his insight and ad- vice privately in my office and counsel on all of the big policy decisions I’ve had to consider in my two years as Vice Chair. Thomas made everyone that he worked with better and inspired to put forth their best energy and effort to achieve larger goals. That was most certainly the case in the framework review, and I’ll second what Vice Chair Williams and Chair Powell said. Thomas brought peerless leadership, energy, and a commitment to the en- tire framework review. We simply would not have achieved the evolution of our framework and strategy without Thomas and the insight, inspiration, and good judgment he brought to the project and the ambitious process that he designed and worked with us to implement. I understand that in Thomas’s last days, he was able to watch the Chair’s speech at Jackson Hole rolling out the new framework, and that he was so proud to have been part of what the Wall Street Journal called a landmark change in U.S. monetary policy. I’m sure I speak for all of us when I conclude by saying that it is we who are proud to have had the privilege of working with Thomas Laubach during his 20 years at the Fed. He is and will be deeply missed, but his spirit and inspiration to us all will endure.” Minutes of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The System Open Market Account (SOMA) manager first discussed developments in financial markets. On net, financial conditions eased over the intermeeting pe- riod. Equity prices rose and the broad dollar continued to depreciate from its crisis-driven peak in March. Yields on Treasury inflation-protected securities fell, while longer-dated nominal Treasury yields increased modestly. Market participants attributed these developments to a stronger economic outlook, better news on the COVID- 19 trajectory, better-than-feared corporate earnings re- ports, and accommodative policy. Against this back- drop, most respondents to the Open Market Desk’s Sur- vey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Partici- pants perceived downside risks to U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) growth this year as having declined no- tably since the July survey, and their forecasts for overall growth for 2020 were revised up significantly. While the economic outlook had brightened, market participants continued to see significant risks ahead. Some noted concerns about elevated asset valuations in certain sectors. Many also cited geopolitical events as heightening uncertainty. In addition, most forecasters were assuming that an additional pandemic-related fiscal package would be approved this year, and noted that, absent a new package, growth could decelerate at a faster-than-expected pace in the fourth quarter. In light of these and other risks, as well as the ongoing pan- demic, market participants continued to suggest that the supportive policy environment and the backstops to market functioning remained important stabilizers. The release of the revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (consensus state- ment) elicited relatively modest immediate reaction across markets. However, market participants generally viewed the completion of the review as an important milestone; many indicated that growing expectations for the Committee to adopt a flexible average-inflation- targeting regime had influenced asset prices over recent months. In particular, these expectations were viewed as contributing to the recent rise in far-forward measures of inflation compensation, though market participants noted that these measures were still somewhat low by historical standards. Market participants continued to anticipate that the Committee would update its forward guidance for the federal funds rate. Most respondents to the Desk’s sur- veys continued to indicate that they expected the FOMC to adopt outcome-based forward guidance linked to in- flation; some noted that employment measures could be part of the forward guidance as well. Survey respond- ents’ expectations for the economic conditions that would prevail when the FOMC first lifted the target range had shifted notably since the previous survey, with many respondents projecting somewhat higher inflation and lower unemployment than in July. Expectations for asset purchases this year remained tightly centered around the current pace; however, many survey re- spondents revised up the amount of asset purchases ex- pected in 2021 and 2022. The manager turned next to a discussion of funding mar- ket conditions and open market operations over the pe- riod. Conditions in short-term dollar funding markets remained stable over the period. Overnight secured and unsecured rates continued to trade in narrow ranges near the interest on excess reserves rate. Forward measures of funding rates implied that conditions were expected to remain stable in coming months. to (MBS) continued Markets for Treasury securities and agency mortgage- backed securities function smoothly, with bid-ask spreads and a range of other in- dicators remaining near pre-pandemic levels. Indicators of functioning in the market for agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) also remained sta- ble. In light of the improved conditions, the staff pro- posed that the Desk no longer be required to increase agency CMBS holdings or reinvest principal payments for agency CMBS. For the time being, the Desk would continue to conduct regular agency CMBS operations to maintain backstop capacity. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activ- ity in the United States and abroad. The information available at the time of the September 15–16 meeting suggested that U.S. real GDP was rebounding at a rapid rate in the third quarter. Labor market conditions con- tinued to improve markedly in July and August, but em- ployment was still below its level at the beginning of the year. Consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for per- sonal consumption expenditures (PCE) through July— Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ remained well below the rates that prevailed early in the year. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded strongly in July and August, although payrolls had retraced only about half of the jobs lost at the onset of the pandemic. The unemployment rate moved down further to 8.4 per- cent in August. The unemployment rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics declined over the past two months but remained well above the national aver- age. The labor force participation rate rose, on net, and the employment-to-population ratio increased further in July and August. Initial claims for unemployment insur- ance benefits continued to move down, on net, through early September, but the pace of declines had slowed. In addition, weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls con- structed by the Board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor ADP suggested that employment gains likely were still solid from mid-August to early Septem- ber. index (CPI) Total PCE price inflation was 1.0 percent over the 12 months ending in July, reflecting both weak aggregate demand and a considerable drop in consumer energy prices early this year. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.3 percent over the same 12-month period. By comparison, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 1.8 percent in July. The consumer price increased 1.3 percent over the 12 months ending in August, while core CPI inflation was 1.7 percent over the same period. On a monthly basis, recent inflation readings were bolstered by in- creases in durable goods prices, largely reflecting the strong demand for consumer goods as household pur- chases shifted away from many consumer services. The latest readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations moved up a bit but remained within their ranges in recent years. The University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years edged up in July and August, and the three- year-ahead measure from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations also crept up over the past two months. Real PCE expanded strongly in July and continued to be bolstered by supportive fiscal and monetary policy ac- tions. In August, the components of retail sales used to estimate PCE, along with sales of light motor vehicles, increased further. However, recent high-frequency indi- cators of spending on some consumer services—such as restaurant dining, hotel accommodations, and air travel—were still subdued. Real disposable personal in- come was roughly flat in July, primarily reflecting further gains in wage and salary income that were largely offset by the waning of government transfer payments from their peak in the spring. Nevertheless, the personal sav- ing rate remained quite elevated. The consumer senti- ment measure from the Michigan survey edged up in August, while the Conference Board survey measure moved down; both measures continued to be below their levels at the beginning of the year. Housing-sector activity continued to expand, likely sup- ported by the effects of low interest rates. Starts and building permit issuance for single-family homes, along with starts of multifamily units, increased further in July. Sales of both new and existing homes also rose substan- tially further. These measures of construction and sales were generally at or near their pre-pandemic levels. Indicators of business fixed investment suggested that this sector was beginning to recover on balance. Nomi- nal new orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased in July, the third con- secutive monthly increase in these indicators of business equipment spending. Many measures of business senti- ment also improved somewhat in July and August. In addition, the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation through early September—an indicator of business spending on structures in the drilling and min- ing sector—had flattened out recently following its de- clines since the spring. In contrast, nominal business spending on nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector declined over June and July. Industrial production expanded further in July and Au- gust, although at a less rapid pace than over the preced- ing two months. The increase in factory output was broad based, but the gains for most manufacturing in- dustries had slowed gradually since June. Production in the mining sector—which includes crude oil and natural gas drilling and extraction—increased in July but fell in August, as Tropical Storm Marco and Hurricane Laura caused sharp but temporary decreases in extraction and drilling. Total real government purchases appeared to be increas- ing modestly, on balance, in the third quarter. Federal defense spending continued to rise through August, and federal employment was boosted markedly by temporary census-related hiring. State and local government pay- rolls expanded in July and August, although nominal state and local construction expenditures decreased in June and July. Minutes of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ After declining sharply earlier this year, exports and im- ports of goods and services increased strongly in June and July. On net, over these two months, the nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened, as imports rose more than exports. Exports and imports of goods rose in June and July in most major product categories, while exports and imports of services rose modestly following previous historic declines. Foreign economic activity plunged in the second quarter as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associ- ated restrictive measures to contain it. With some of these measures having been rolled back in recent months, economic indicators pointed to a large, but par- tial, rebound in most foreign economies in the third quarter. Recent indicators of household and business spending were strong in several economies (including Canada, the euro area, and Brazil), reflecting in part a boost from substantial government support programs. In China, economic indicators showed a continued moderate expansion after a sharp rebound in the second quarter, though gains in consumption continued to lag those in production and exports. Similarly, in Mexico, a strong rebound in manufacturing production contrasted with weak services activity. Despite the widespread re- bound in foreign activity indicators, a resurgence in COVID-19 cases in parts of Europe and Asia added un- certainty to the outlook for those economies. Recent readings of headline and core inflation abroad remained quite low, particularly in the advanced foreign econo- mies (AFEs), amid subdued demand pressures and lower energy prices from earlier this year. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Financial market sentiment improved over the inter- meeting period, boosted by declines in the number of new COVID-19 cases in the United States and stronger- than-anticipated corporate earnings reports and domes- tic economic data releases. Broad stock price indexes rose, on net, despite notable declines late in the inter- meeting period. Inflation compensation increased fur- ther, reaching pre-pandemic levels. Changes in other as- set prices were generally more modest but were con- sistent with improved sentiment: The Treasury yield curve steepened a little, spreads on speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed moderately, and the ex- change value of the dollar depreciated modestly. Mean- while, financing conditions for businesses with access to capital markets and households with high credit scores remained broadly accommodative, although conditions remained tight for other borrowers. Yields on 2-year nominal Treasury securities were little changed since the July FOMC meeting, while 10- and 30-year yields rose moderately. Market commentary at- tributed the increases in longer-term yields to improved investor sentiment. This improved sentiment partly re- flected the decline in new COVID-19 cases in the United States and stronger-than-expected economic data, al- though market reactions to economic data releases were limited. The near-dated implied volatility on 10-year Treasury securities was little changed over the intermeet- ing period and remained near the bottom of its historical range. Measures of inflation compensation based on TIPS maturing over the next few years continued to in- crease, likely reflecting the general improvement in in- vestor sentiment accompanying the improvement in the economic outlook, some further improvements in TIPS market liquidity, and the higher-than-expected July CPI data release. The 5-year and 5-to-10-year measures of inflation compensation were close to their pre-pandemic levels but were still in the lower end of their historical ranges. The expected path for the federal funds rate over the next few years, as implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes, was little changed, on net, since the July FOMC meeting and remained close to the effective lower bound (ELB) through the first half of 2024. Com- munications about monetary policy over the intermeet- ing period generally had little effect on Treasury yields or the expected path of the federal funds rate. However, market participants suggested that building expectations that the Committee would move to a form of flexible average inflation targeting under the revised consensus statement had been a factor boosting TIPS inflation compensation over recent months. Broad stock price indexes rose, on net, during the inter- meeting period, consistent with generally better-than-ex- pected news on both the economy and second-quarter corporate earnings. One-month option-implied volatil- ity on the S&P 500—the VIX—was roughly unchanged, on net, although measures of longer-term downside risks in equity markets, such as the option-implied cost of in- suring against a 10 percent decline in the S&P 500 index in three months, increased somewhat. Spreads of invest- ment- and speculative-grade corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury yields narrowed some- what and remained near their historical medians. Conditions in short-term funding markets were stable over the intermeeting period. Spreads on commercial paper (CP) and negotiable certificates of deposit across different tenors changed little, on net, and remained Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ around levels observed before the pandemic. Total gross CP issuance also remained within pre-pandemic normal ranges, although outstanding volumes of nonfi- nancial CP declined moderately since the July FOMC meeting. Assets under management of prime and gov- ernment money market funds (MMFs) declined mod- estly on net. Partly reversing changes observed between April and July, institutional government MMFs, on net, decreased their holdings of Treasury securities and in- creased their holdings of repurchase agreements (repos) in August. The reversal was driven in part by a tighter spread between Treasury bill yields and repo rates. Amid normalizing market conditions, there was little activity in the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility or the Commercial Paper Funding Facility. The effective federal funds rate and the Secured Over- night Financing Rate averaged 9 basis points over the intermeeting period. The amount of Federal Reserve repo outstanding remained at zero over the intermeeting period due to more attractive rates in the private market. Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve increased holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS at the same pace as during the previous intermeeting period. Foreign asset price movements were generally muted, with market participants likely weighing concerns over rising infection rates in some countries against the pro- spect of a COVID-19 vaccine. In emerging market economies (EMEs), Asian equity markets significantly outperformed Latin American counterparts, with Chi- nese equities showing particular strength. In most AFEs, equity indexes rose modestly and long-term sov- ereign yields edged higher. In line with the modest improvement in risk sentiment, the staff’s broad dollar index declined moderately, on net, with the dollar depreciating more against EME cur- rencies. The Chinese renminbi was boosted by better- than-expected Chinese economic data and was the most notable contributor to the decline in the staff’s trade- weighted dollar index, along with the Mexican peso. Among AFE currencies, the euro appreciated further and reached its highest level against the dollar since 2018. The pound was little changed, as some of its ear- lier appreciation against the dollar unwound amid a re- surgence of Brexit-related uncertainty. Financing conditions in capital markets remained ac- commodative over the intermeeting period. Amid his- torically low corporate bond yields, gross issuance of both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds was strong in July and August. Much of this recent issu- ance was intended to refinance existing debt. Gross in- stitutional leveraged loan issuance picked up slightly in July but remained below the levels observed during the same period last year. Amid notable equity market gains in August, gross equity issuance was robust, as seasoned offerings strengthened to about double their typical pace. Commercial and industrial loans outstanding de- clined in July and August, but at a slower pace than in June, with declines in large part reflecting continued credit-line repayment. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations showed tentative signs of stabilization over the intermeeting pe- riod. The dollar volume of nonfinancial corporate bond downgrades continued to exceed upgrades, albeit only modestly, representing a sizable reduction in net down- grades since the spring. The pace of nonfinancial cor- porate bond defaults in July was also notably lower than in April and May but was still elevated relative to pre- pandemic levels. Default volumes fell further in August, reaching a level below the 2019 monthly average. Mar- ket indicators of future default expectations also im- proved somewhat. Financing conditions for small businesses remained tight, although some indicators pointed to a slight im- provement. Thirty-day delinquency rates fell modestly between May and July but remained comparable with early 2008 levels. The credit needs of small businesses remained high, with significant shares of respondents to the Census Bureau’s Small Business Pulse Survey report- ing scarce cash availability and anticipating a need for fi- nancial assistance in the next six months. Municipal market financing conditions remained accom- modative since the July FOMC meeting. However, the credit quality of municipal debt deteriorated somewhat, driven by a relatively large volume of credit rating down- grades of revenue bonds. Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE) intermediated through capital markets recovered further over the intermeeting period. Spreads on triple-B non- agency CMBS remained wide, though they continued to narrow through August, while triple-A spreads remained close to pre-pandemic levels. Issuance of non-agency CMBS was steady but subdued relative to pre-pandemic levels. Spreads on agency CMBS were tight and issuance was very strong, setting a new single-month record in July. In contrast, CRE loan growth at banks was weak in July and August, likely partly driven by the recovery of CMBS markets. Delinquency rates on mortgages backing CMBS fell a bit in July but remained high in the hotel and retail sectors. Minutes of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were little changed over the intermeeting period. While mortgage rates hovered near historical lows, the spread between primary mortgage rates and MBS yields re- mained quite wide. Credit continued to flow to higher- score borrowers who met standard conforming loan cri- teria, while it remained tight for borrowers with lower credit scores and for nonstandard mortgage products. Nonetheless, low mortgage rates were supporting both home-purchase originations and refinancing. The credit quality of mortgages improved slightly, with the rate of transition remaining near pre- pandemic levels and forbearance continuing to slowly decline. into delinquency Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re- mained accommodative for borrowers with relatively strong credit scores but continued to be tight for sub- prime borrowers. Auto loan balances increased solidly overall but declined for borrowers with low credit scores. Credit card balances contracted at a slower rate in June and July than in the spring. However, offered interest rates rose and credit limits edged down for credit cards to nonprime borrowers. Conditions in the asset- backed securities (ABS) market were stable during the intermeeting period. ABS spreads edged down, and auto and student loan issuance was robust. Consumer credit performance remained stable, and the share of auto and credit card balances in forbearance declined. Staff Economic Outlook In the U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the September FOMC meeting, the rate of real GDP growth and the pace of declines in the unemployment rate were faster over the second half of this year than in the July forecast, primarily reflecting recent better-than- expected data. In addition, the inflation forecast for the rest of the year was revised up slightly, as some recent consumer goods prices were stronger than expected. Nevertheless, inflation was still projected to be subdued this year, reflecting substantial slack in resource utiliza- tion and the sizable declines in consumer energy prices earlier this year. Fiscal policy measures, along with the support from monetary policy and the Federal Reserve’s liquidity and lending facilities, were expected to continue supporting the second-half recovery, although the re- covery was forecast to be far from complete by year-end. The staff’s forecast assumed the enactment of some ad- ditional fiscal policy support this year; without that addi- tional policy action, the pace of the economic recovery would likely be slower. In the staff’s medium-term projection, the baseline as- sumptions included that the current restrictions on so- cial interactions and business operations, along with vol- untary social distancing by individuals and firms, would ease gradually through next year. In addition, the staff projection assumed that monetary policy would be even more accommodative than in the previous forecast in order to more fully reflect the revised consensus state- ment. Altogether, the rate of real GDP growth was pro- jected to exceed potential output growth, the unemploy- ment rate was expected to decline considerably further, and inflation was forecast to pick back up in 2021 through 2023. With the more-accommodative monetary policy assumed in the current forecast, which reflected the recent consensus statement, inflation was projected to moderately overshoot 2 percent for some time in the years beyond 2023. The staff continued to observe that the uncertainty re- lated to the course of the COVID-19 pandemic and its associated economic effects was extremely elevated and that the risks to the outlook were still tilted to the down- side. Given the apparent resilience of the U.S. economy to the acceleration in the spread of the pandemic during the summer, the staff judged that a significantly more pessimistic economic outcome, which the staff had pre- viously viewed as no less plausible than the baseline fore- cast and had featured a renewed downturn in economic activity, was now less likely than the baseline forecast. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2020 through 2023 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of ap- propriate monetary policy—including the path for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections repre- sented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. These projections are described in the SEP, which is an addendum to these minutes. Participants noted that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Eco- nomic activity and employment had picked up in recent months but remained well below their levels at the be- ginning of the year. Weaker demand and significantly Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ lower oil prices were holding down consumer price in- flation. Overall financial conditions had improved in re- cent months, in part reflecting policy measures to sup- port the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. house- holds and businesses. Participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and infla- tion in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economy’s medium-term outlook. Participants observed that the incoming data indicated that economic activity was recovering faster than ex- pected from its depressed second-quarter level, when much of the economy was shut down to stem the spread of the virus. In particular, with the reopening of many businesses and fewer people withdrawing from social in- teractions, consumer spending was rebounding sharply and appeared to have recovered about three-fourths of its earlier decline. Prior fiscal policy actions were seen as having supported the ability and willingness of house- holds to spend, although most participants expressed concern about the expiration of the enhanced unem- ployment insurance benefits from the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) and judged that additional fiscal relief would help sustain the recovery in household spending. Indeed, many par- ticipants noted that their economic outlook assumed ad- ditional fiscal support and that if future fiscal support was significantly smaller or arrived significantly later than they expected, the pace of the recovery could be slower than anticipated. Participants also viewed accom- modative monetary policy as contributing to gains in res- idential investment as well as consumer purchases of motor vehicles and other durable goods. While partici- pants pointed to strength in consumers’ purchases of goods, especially those sold online, they noted that out- lays for services had been slower to recover, particularly for items such as air travel, hotel accommodations, and restaurant meals, which had been significantly disrupted by social-distancing measures. Participants generally ex- pected spending on these services to remain subdued for some time and thus to be a restraining factor on the pace of the recovery. A few participants raised the possibility that the unwinding of the large pool of household sav- ings accumulated during the pandemic could provide greater-than-anticipated momentum to consumption going forward. However, a couple of other participants judged that if this savings reflected reduced spending on in-person services by high-income consumers, it was un- likely to provide much momentum to future consump- tion. Participants noted that business investment, which had plummeted in the second quarter, appeared to have be- gun to turn around. They pointed to data showing gains in capital goods orders and shipments as well as im- proved business sentiment. A number of participants judged that low interest rates were supporting business investment. However, the recovery was viewed as une- venly distributed across industries. While many business contacts reported progress on adapting to the pandemic, others noted that industries that relied more on person- to-person interactions continued to struggle. Business contacts with ties to the motor vehicle or housing indus- tries indicated increased activity, while those closer to the aviation, hospitality, and nonresidential construction industries were not seeing much of a recovery. Contacts continued to report ongoing stresses in the energy sec- tor, as well as challenges in the agricultural sector even though some crop prices had risen recently as sales to China increased. Although business contacts indicated that overall busi- ness activity had been stronger than they expected, it re- mained well below pre-pandemic levels. Business con- tacts pointed to several factors that could restrain further recovery, including high levels of uncertainty that were reportedly still holding back hiring and capital spending. Some contacts reported difficulties in managing disrup- tions in supply chains as well as elevated levels of em- ployee absenteeism because of the pandemic. Addition- ally, District contacts indicated that fiscal policy had helped support small businesses, while federal aid pay- ments had helped support farm incomes. Participants observed that labor market conditions con- tinued to improve in recent months and that the econ- omy through August had regained roughly half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in March and April. The gains in employment over July and August were gener- ally seen as larger than anticipated. Participants judged, however, that the labor market was a long way from be- ing fully recovered. They generally agreed that prospects for a further substantial improvement in the labor mar- ket would depend on a broad and sustained reopening of businesses, which in turn would depend importantly on how safe individuals felt to reengage in a wide range of activities. Some participants noted that the majority of gains in employment so far reflected workers on tem- porary layoffs returning to work. These participants judged it as less likely for future job gains to continue at their recent pace, because a greater share of the remain- ing layoffs might become permanent. Workers facing permanent layoffs were seen as more likely to need to find new jobs in different industries, and this process Minutes of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ could take time, especially to the extent that these work- ers needed to be retrained. Participants observed that lower-paid workers had been disproportionally affected by the economic effects of the pandemic. Many of these workers were employed in the service sector or other industries most adversely affected by social-distancing measures. With a disproportionate share of service-sector jobs held by African Americans, Hispanics, and women, these groups were seen as being especially hard hit by the economic hardships caused by the pandemic. Participants viewed fiscal support from the CARES Act as having been very important in bol- stering the financial situations of millions of families, and a number of participants judged that the absence of fur- ther fiscal support would exacerbate economic hard- ships in minority and lower-income communities. In ad- dition, several participants observed that the effects of the pandemic were disrupting the supply of labor be- cause of the need to care for children, many of whom were attending school virtually from home. In their comments about inflation, participants noted that consumer prices had increased more quickly than expected in recent months and that market-based measures of inflation compensation had increased mod- erately over the intermeeting period, although they re- mained low. The upturn in consumer prices was primar- ily attributed to price increases in sectors such as con- sumer durables in which demand had risen after experi- encing a large decline earlier this spring. Nevertheless, inflation remained subdued, and participants still gener- ally judged that the overall effect of the pandemic on prices was disinflationary. While the outlook for infla- tion was viewed as highly uncertain, a number of partic- ipants projected that inflation would run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective for a signif- icant period before moving moderately above 2 percent for some time—consistent with the Committee’s revised consensus statement. Participants noted that financial conditions were gener- ally accommodative and that actions by the Federal Re- serve, including the establishment of emergency lending facilities in conjunction with the Treasury, were support- ing the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities. While these actions as well as prompt and forceful monetary policy measures in response to the pandemic were viewed as contributing to accommoda- tive financial conditions, participants noted important differences in credit quality and credit availability across borrowers. While the pace of corporate downgrades was seen as having decreased significantly in recent months, the delinquency rates on business loans had risen notice- ably. Bank contacts reported ample capacity to lend to creditworthy borrowers; however, surveys of credit availability indicated that bank lending was tight. Fur- thermore, several participants noted the stress that small- and medium-sized banks could face from defaults on loans to small businesses and CRE properties if peo- ple continued to withdraw from travel and shopping ac- tivities. Additionally, a couple of participants indicated that highly accommodative financial market conditions could lead to excessive risk-taking and to a buildup of financial imbalances. Participants continued to see the uncertainty surround- ing the economic outlook as very elevated, with the path of the economy highly dependent on the course of the virus; on how individuals, businesses, and public officials responded to it; and on the effectiveness of public health measures to address it. Participants cited several down- side risks that could threaten the recovery. While the risk of another broad economic shutdown was seen as having receded, participants remained concerned about the possibility of additional virus outbreaks that could undermine the recovery. Such scenarios could result in increases in bankruptcies and defaults, put stress on the financial system, and lead to disruptions in the flow of credit to households and businesses. Most participants raised the concern that fiscal support so far for house- holds, businesses, and state and local governments might not provide sufficient relief to these sectors. A couple of participants saw an upside risk that further fiscal stim- ulus could be larger than anticipated, though it might come later than had been expected. Several participants raised concerns regarding the longer-run effects of the pandemic, including how it could lead to a restructuring in some sectors of the economy that could slow employ- ment growth or could accelerate technological disrup- tion that was likely limiting the pricing power of firms. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed that they were committed to us- ing the Federal Reserve’s full range of tools in order to support the U.S. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the Committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. They also noted that the path of the economy would depend sig- nificantly on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on eco- nomic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic out- look over the medium term. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ All participants agreed that the completion of the frame- work review and the publication of the revised consen- sus statement provided a strong foundation for mone- tary policy decisions and communications going for- ward. Accordingly, participants agreed that it would be appropriate to incorporate some key elements of the re- vised consensus statement into the FOMC statement to be released following this meeting. In particular, partic- ipants reiterated their commitment to achieve maximum employment and an inflation rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running persistently below its longer-run goal, participants judged that it would be ap- propriate to aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation would average 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expecta- tions would remain well anchored at 2 percent. Against this backdrop, participants discussed a range of issues associated with providing greater clarity about the likely path of the federal funds rate in the years ahead. Most participants supported providing more explicit outcome-based forward guidance for the federal funds rate that included establishing criteria for lifting the fed- eral funds rate above the ELB in terms of the paths for employment or inflation or both. Among the partici- pants who favored providing more explicit forward guidance at this meeting, all but a couple supported a formulation in which the forward guidance included lan- guage indicating that it would likely be appropriate to maintain the current target range until labor market con- ditions were judged to be consistent with the Commit- tee’s assessments of maximum employment and infla- tion had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moder- ately exceed 2 percent for some time. These participants noted that communicating that the target range for the federal funds rate would remain at the ELB until these criteria were achieved would provide appropriately clear and strong policy guidance. Doing so at this meeting was viewed as an especially important way of affirming the Committee’s commitment to achieving the eco- nomic outcomes articulated in the consensus statement. Participants generally noted that outcome-based for- ward guidance for the federal funds rate of this type was not an unconditional commitment to a particular path. Indeed, outcome-based guidance of this type would al- low the public to infer changes in the Committee’s as- sessment of how long the target range for the federal funds rate would remain at its current setting. Infor- mation pointing to a weaker outlook for the economy and inflation would tend to lead to public expectations for a longer period at the current setting of the target range while information suggesting a stronger outlook for the economy and inflation would tend to lead to ex- pectations for a shorter period at the current setting. In addition, circumstances could arise in which the Com- mittee judged that it would be appropriate to change its guidance, particularly if risks emerged that could impede the attainment of its economic objectives. A couple of participants preferred even stronger, and less qualified, outcome-based forward guidance that they judged would more clearly convey the Committee’s commitment to its objectives and to the strategic ap- proach that was articulated in the revised consensus statement. In particular, these participants preferred for- ward guidance in which the target range for the federal funds rate remained at the ELB until inflation had moved above 2 percent for some time. Especially in light of the lengthy period in which inflation has run be- low the Committee’s longer-run 2 percent objective, these participants judged that it was critical to demon- strate the Committee’s commitment to achieve out- comes in which inflation averages 2 percent over time. Several participants noted that while they agreed it was appropriate to incorporate key elements of the consen- sus statement into the postmeeting statement, they pre- ferred to retain forward guidance similar to that pro- vided in recent FOMC statements. These participants judged that it would likely be appropriate to maintain an accommodative stance of policy for some time in order to foster outcomes consistent with the Committee’s re- vised consensus statement. However, with longer-term interest rates already very low, there did not appear to be a need for enhanced forward guidance at this juncture or much scope for forward guidance to put additional downward pressure on yields. Moreover, these partici- pants were concerned that forward guidance that in- volved the target range for the federal funds rate remain- ing at the ELB until employment and inflation criteria were achieved could limit the Committee’s flexibility for years. Furthermore, by influencing expectations for the path of short-term interest rates, such guidance could contribute to a buildup of financial imbalances that would make it more difficult for the Committee to achieve its objectives in the future. Regarding asset purchases, participants judged that it would be appropriate over coming months for the Fed- eral Reserve to increase its holdings of Treasury securi- ties and agency MBS at least at the current pace. These actions would continue to help sustain smooth market functioning and would continue to help foster accom- modative financial conditions, thereby supporting the Minutes of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ flow of credit to households and businesses. Some par- ticipants also noted that in future meetings it would be appropriate to further assess and communicate how the Committee’s asset purchase program could best support the Committee’s maximum- the achievement of employment and price-stability goals. Participants widely echoed the remarks at the opening of the meeting in memory of Thomas Laubach. Partici- pants universally recognized his great leadership and in- tellectual contributions to the work of the Committee as well as his warm and generous spirit. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. They noted that economic activity and employment had picked up in recent months but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year, and that weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. Overall, financial con- ditions had improved in recent months, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-em- ployment and price-stability goals. Members also stated that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus. In addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and was posing considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. All members agreed to incorporate into the postmeeting statement key elements of the Committee’s revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. Members judged that this action would under- score the Committee’s strong commitment to the goals and strategy articulated in the new consensus statement in pursuit of the Committee’s statutory objectives. Ac- cordingly, members agreed that the FOMC statement should note that the Committee seeks to achieve maxi- mum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and that, with inflation running per- sistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well an- chored at 2 percent. Members generally expected that it would be appropriate to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes were achieved. All members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. Almost all members viewed this meeting as the appropriate time to modify forward guidance to provide greater clarity regarding the likely future path of the federal funds rate. To this end, almost all members agreed on a specification for out- come-based forward guidance that indicated that the Committee expects that it will be appropriate to main- tain the current setting of the target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions had reached lev- els consistent with the Committee’s assessments of max- imum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to run moderately in excess of 2 per- cent for some time. Two members dissented from the policy decision. One of these dissenting members pre- ferred that the Committee retain greater policy rate flex- ibility by retaining the language in the forward guidance provided in the July postmeeting statement; that lan- guage noted that it would be appropriate to maintain the current target range until the Committee was confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. The other dissenting member preferred a stronger formulation for the forward guidance—one in which the Committee would indicate that it expected to maintain the current target range until core inflation had reached 2 percent on a sustained basis. In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members generally agreed that the Committee’s policy guidance expressed its assessment about the path for the federal funds rate most likely to be consistent with achievement of the Committee’s goals, but that it was not an unconditional commitment. They stated that the appropriate rate path would depend on the evolution of the economic outlook. Accordingly, they agreed that the Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Members also agreed that, in assessing the appro- priate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pres- sures and inflation expectations, and financial and inter- national developments. Members noted that the Committee’s asset purchases had helped foster significant improvements in market functioning over recent months. In addition, purchases Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ of securities were contributing to accommodative finan- cial conditions in a way that supported economic recov- ery. Consistent with these observations, members agreed that it would be appropriate to acknowledge in the postmeeting statement the role of asset purchases in supporting accommodative financial conditions. The Committee’s statement thus indicated that over coming months it would be appropriate for the Federal Reserve to increase its holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS at least at the current pace to sustain smooth mar- ket functioning and to help foster accommodative finan- cial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. Members considered the staff proposal to eliminate the requirement in the directive to increase the holdings of agency CMBS in the SOMA portfolio. In light of the substantial improvement in market functioning in the agency CMBS market, the Committee judged that it would be appropriate for the Desk to purchase agency CMBS only as needed to sustain smooth market func- tioning, rather than seek to steadily increase agency CMBS holdings, and to cease reinvestments of agency CMBS principal payments. Members also concluded that, in light of ongoing low take-up at Desk repo oper- ations, it was not necessary to include a sentence on these operations in the FOMC statement. However, the directive adopted by the Committee continued to direct the Desk to conduct overnight and term repo operations to support effective policy implementation and smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar funding markets. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective September 17, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. Increase the System Open Market Ac- count holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at the current pace. Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by ad- ditional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) as needed to sustain smooth func- tioning of markets for these securities. • Conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar funding markets. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-coun- terparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate set- tlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. The COVID-19 pandemic is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Economic activity and employment have picked up in re- cent months but remain well below their levels at the beginning of the year. Weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices are holding down consumer price inflation. Overall finan- cial conditions have improved in recent months, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. house- holds and businesses. The path of the economy will depend signifi- cantly on the course of the virus. The ongoing public health crisis will continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. Minutes of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running per- sistently below this longer-run goal, the Com- mittee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Com- mittee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and in- flation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, over coming months the Federal Re- serve will increase its holdings of Treasury secu- rities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth mar- ket functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting against this action: Robert S. Kaplan and Neel Kashkari. President Kaplan dissented because he expects that it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range until the Committee is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals as artic- ulated in its new policy strategy statement, but prefers that the Committee retain greater policy rate flexibility beyond that point. President Kashkari dissented be- cause he prefers that the Committee indicate that it ex- pects to maintain the current target range until core in- flation has reached 2 percent on a sustained basis. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. The Board of Governors also voted unan- imously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective Sep- tember 17, 2020. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Wednesday–Thursday, November 4– 5, 2020. The meeting adjourned at 11:00 a.m. on Sep- tember 16, 2020. Notation Votes By notation vote completed on August 18, 2020, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 28–29, 2020. By notation vote completed on August 27, 2020, the Committee unanimously approved updates to its State- ment on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strat- egy. In conjunction with the notation vote, all non- voting participants also expressed support for the up- dated statement. Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Patrick Harker, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Summary of Economic Projections In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- tee (FOMC) meeting held on September 15–16, 2020, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2020 to 2023 and over the longer run. Each participant’s projections were based on infor- mation available at the time of the meeting, together with her or his assessment of appropriate monetary policy— including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer- run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projec- tions represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to con- verge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.1 “Ap- propriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to fos- ter outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. The current projections for real activity, the labor mar- ket, and inflation were notably stronger than the projec- tions in the June 2020 Summary of Economic Projec- tions (SEP) for the overlapping years from 2020 to 2022. Participants revised up their economic outlook in light of the stronger-than-expected rebound in economic ac- tivity over recent months, although they noted that they remained attentive to the effects of the COVID-19 pan- demic and the measures taken to contain it. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. Almost all participants projected that real GDP will con- tract in 2020, with the median participant seeing a milder contraction relative to the median projection in the June SEP. Additionally, almost all participants projected that real GDP would grow faster than their estimates of its longer-run normal growth rate from 2021 to 2023. All participants projected that the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2020 would be notably lower than they had projected in June and that the unemployment rate would decline gradually during the forecast period. Most participants expected that a full economic recovery would take some time, and many projected that the un- employment rate in the final quarter of 2023 would be 1 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. slightly below its estimated longer-run level. A vast ma- jority of participants projected that total inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would be at or below the FOMC’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective throughout the forecast period. Pro- jections for core PCE price inflation, which excludes consumer food and energy prices, generally followed a similar trajectory. to relative As shown in figure 2, most participants indicated that their expectations regarding the evolution of the econ- omy, the Committee’s maximum- employment and price-stability objectives, would likely warrant keeping the federal funds rate at its current level through at least the end of 2023. The median of partic- ipants’ assessments of the longer-run level for the federal funds rate was unchanged from its value in the June SEP. Amid uncertainty about the course of the pandemic and its effects on the economy, all participants continued to regard the uncertainties surrounding the economic out- look as higher than the average over the past 20 years. In addition, a substantial majority of participants as- sessed the risks to their outlook for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and the risks to their unem- ployment rate projections as weighted to the upside. The risks to inflation projections were judged as weighted to the downside by a substantial majority of participants. The Outlook for Real GDP Growth and the Unem- ployment Rate As shown in figure 3.A, almost all participants continued to project that real GDP would decline in 2020, with the median projection anticipating a decrease of 3.7 percent. Nevertheless, these projections were substantially stronger than those from the June SEP, when the me- dian participant expected real GDP to contract 6.5 per- cent. These revisions, in part, reflect the stronger-than- expected incoming data since June. Almost all partici- pants expected that the rate of real GDP growth from 2021 to 2023 would be above their estimates of its longer-run pace, with the median projections being 4.0 percent, 3.0 percent, and 2.5 percent in these years, respectively. The distribution of estimates of real GDP Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, September 2020 Percent Median1 Central Tendency2 Range3 Variable 2020 2021 2022 2023 Longer 2020 2021 2022 2023 Change in real GDP June projection Unemployment rate June projection PCE inﬂation June projection Core PCE inﬂation4 June projection Memo: Projected appropriate policy path -3.7 -6.5 7.6 9.3 1.2 0.8 1.5 1.0 4.0 5.0 5.5 6.5 1.7 1.6 1.7 1.5 3.0 3.5 4.6 5.5 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.7 2.5 4.0 2.0 2.0 run 1.9 1.8 4.1 4.1 2.0 2.0 -4.0– -3.0 -7.6– -5.5 7.0–8.0 9.0–10.0 1.1–1.3 0.6–1.0 1.3–1.5 0.9–1.1 3.6–4.7 4.5–6.0 5.0–6.2 5.9–7.5 1.6–1.9 1.4–1.7 1.6–1.8 1.4–1.7 2.5–3.3 3.0–4.5 4.0–5.0 4.8–6.1 1.7–1.9 1.6–1.8 1.7–1.9 1.6–1.8 2.4–3.0 3.5–4.4 1.9–2.0 1.9–2.0 Longer run 1.7–2.0 1.7–2.0 3.9–4.3 4.0–4.3 2.0 2.0 2020 2021 2022 2023 -5.5–1.0 -10.0– -4.2 6.5–8.0 7.0–14.0 1.0–1.5 0.5–1.2 1.2–1.6 0.7–1.3 0.0–5.5 -1.0–7.0 4.0–8.0 4.5–12.0 1.3–2.4 1.1–2.0 1.5–2.4 1.2–2.0 2.0–4.5 2.0–6.0 3.5–7.5 4.0–8.0 1.5–2.2 1.4–2.2 1.6–2.2 1.2–2.2 2.0–4.0 3.5–6.0 1.7–2.1 1.7–2.1 Longer run 1.6–2.2 1.6–2.2 3.5–4.7 3.5–4.7 2.0 2.0 Federal funds rate June projection 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 2.5 2.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1–0.4 2.3–2.5 2.3–2.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1–0.6 0.1–1.1 0.1–1.4 2.0–3.0 2.0–3.0 Note: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inﬂation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inﬂation and core PCE inﬂation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. The June projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 9–10, 2020. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the June 9–10, 2020, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the September 15–16, 2020, meeting. 1. For each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. When the number of projections is even, the median is the average of the two middle projections. 2. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. Longer-run projections for core PCE inﬂation are not collected. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2020–23 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual. −6−5−4−3−2−10123456201520162017201820192020202120222023Median of projectionsCentral tendency of projectionsRange of projectionsActualPercentChange in real GDPLongerrun2345678201520162017201820192020202120222023PercentUnemployment rateLongerrun123201520162017201820192020202120222023PercentPCE inflationLongerrun123201520162017201820192020202120222023PercentCore PCE inflationLongerrunSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the speciﬁed calendar year or over the longer run. One participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. 0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.02020202120222023Longer runPercentPage 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2020–23 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 24681012141618−10.2−−10.1−9.6−−9.5−9.0−−8.9−8.4−−8.3−7.8−−7.7−7.2−−7.1−6.6−−6.5−6.0−−5.9−5.4−−5.3−4.8−−4.7−4.2−−4.1−3.6−−3.5−3.0−−2.9−2.4−−2.3−1.8−−1.7−1.2−−1.1−0.6−−0.50.0−0.10.6−0.71.2−1.31.8−1.92.4−2.53.0−3.13.6−3.74.2−4.34.8−4.95.4−5.56.0−6.16.6−6.7Percent range September projectionsJune projectionsNumber of participants202024681012141618−10.2−−10.1−9.6−−9.5−9.0−−8.9−8.4−−8.3−7.8−−7.7−7.2−−7.1−6.6−−6.5−6.0−−5.9−5.4−−5.3−4.8−−4.7−4.2−−4.1−3.6−−3.5−3.0−−2.9−2.4−−2.3−1.8−−1.7−1.2−−1.1−0.6−−0.50.0−0.10.6−0.71.2−1.31.8−1.92.4−2.53.0−3.13.6−3.74.2−4.34.8−4.95.4−5.56.0−6.16.6−6.7Percent rangeNumber of participants202124681012141618−10.2−−10.1−9.6−−9.5−9.0−−8.9−8.4−−8.3−7.8−−7.7−7.2−−7.1−6.6−−6.5−6.0−−5.9−5.4−−5.3−4.8−−4.7−4.2−−4.1−3.6−−3.5−3.0−−2.9−2.4−−2.3−1.8−−1.7−1.2−−1.1−0.6−−0.50.0−0.10.6−0.71.2−1.31.8−1.92.4−2.53.0−3.13.6−3.74.2−4.34.8−4.95.4−5.56.0−6.16.6−6.7Percent rangeNumber of participants202224681012141618−10.2−−10.1−9.6−−9.5−9.0−−8.9−8.4−−8.3−7.8−−7.7−7.2−−7.1−6.6−−6.5−6.0−−5.9−5.4−−5.3−4.8−−4.7−4.2−−4.1−3.6−−3.5−3.0−−2.9−2.4−−2.3−1.8−−1.7−1.2−−1.1−0.6−−0.50.0−0.10.6−0.71.2−1.31.8−1.92.4−2.53.0−3.13.6−3.74.2−4.34.8−4.95.4−5.56.0−6.16.6−6.7Percent rangeNumber of participants202324681012141618−10.2−−10.1−9.6−−9.5−9.0−−8.9−8.4−−8.3−7.8−−7.7−7.2−−7.1−6.6−−6.5−6.0−−5.9−5.4−−5.3−4.8−−4.7−4.2−−4.1−3.6−−3.5−3.0−−2.9−2.4−−2.3−1.8−−1.7−1.2−−1.1−0.6−−0.50.0−0.10.6−0.71.2−1.31.8−1.92.4−2.53.0−3.13.6−3.74.2−4.34.8−4.95.4−5.56.0−6.16.6−6.7Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 5________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ growth in the longer run was little changed from the June SEP, although the median projection ticked up to 1.9 percent. Reflecting better-than-expected incoming data since June, participants revised down their projections for the unemployment rate considerably through 2022, the fore- cast period in the June SEP (figure 3.B). The projections for the unemployment rate in the final quarter of this year ranged from 6.5 to 8.0 percent, with a median of 7.6 percent, and the ranges for projections from 2020 to 2022 all narrowed considerably since June. The median projected levels of the unemployment rate in the final quarters of 2021 and 2022—at 5.5 percent and 4.6 per- cent, respectively—were above the median estimate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment of 4.1 per- cent. However, the median projection of the unemploy- ment rate in the final quarter of 2023, at 4.0 percent, was slightly below the median estimate of its longer-run value. The distribution of estimates for the longer-run unem- ployment rate was unchanged from the June SEP. Many participants indicated that they were still assessing whether the sharp contraction in economic activity dur- ing the first half of this year was likely to leave a lasting imprint on the labor market or the productive capacity of the economy. The Outlook for Inflation As shown in figures 3.C and 3.D, almost all participants revised up their projections for inflation in 2020 relative to their June projections, with the median projections for total and core inflation at 1.2 percent and 1.5 percent, respectively. Most participants expected inflation to rise over the next three years, although about half of them expected PCE price inflation to still fall short of the Committee’s longer-run 2 percent inflation objective by the end of the forecast horizon. A few participants pro- jected inflation to move above 2 percent before return- ing to 2 percent by 2023. A few participants expected inflation to move above its longer-run level in 2023, and several participants mentioned that they would expect inflation to rise above 2 percent in the years after. Appropriate Monetary Policy As shown in figure 3.E, most participants projected that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent through at least the end of 2023. Most participants noted that their as- sessment of appropriate monetary policy took into ac- count the new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. In particular, because infla- tion has been running persistently below 2 percent, par- ticipants mentioned that they linked their assessment of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate to their assessment of shortfalls of employment from the Com- mittee’s maximum-employment objective and to a mod- erate rise in inflation above 2 percent to help anchor in- flation expectations at the Committee’s 2 percent longer- run goal. The median of participants’ estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate was unchanged from June at 2.50 percent. Uncertainty and Risks In assessing the appropriate path for monetary policy, FOMC participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. As shown in the panels on the left side of figure 4, almost all participants continued to view the current uncertainty surrounding each of the four economic variables—real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, total PCE infla- tion, and core PCE inflation—as being greater than the average over the past 20 years.2 A substantial majority of participants judged the risks to their projections for real GDP growth as weighted to the downside and the risks to their unemployment rate pro- jections as weighted to the upside (figure 4). A substan- tial majority of participants viewed the risks to their in- flation projections as weighted to the downside. In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, the course of the pandemic con- tinued to be mentioned as a key source of uncertainty. The possibility of another wave of contagion and delays in developing a vaccine were seen as potential downside risks to the economic outlook. As for upside risks, par- ticipants mentioned the possibility of faster-than- 2 As a reference, table 2 provides estimates of the forecast un- certainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 2000 through 2019. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of un- certainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections. Previous SEP addendums to the FOMC minutes contained figures showing the median projections along with confidence intervals based on historical forecast errors. As the level of uncertainty about the economic outlook is currently judged to be higher than its historical average because of uncertainty about the course of the coronavirus and its effects on the economy, these “fan charts” have been omitted from this ad- dendum. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2020–23 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 246810121416183.0−3.13.6−3.74.2−4.34.8−4.95.4−5.56.0−6.16.6−6.77.2−7.37.8−7.98.4−8.59.0−9.19.6−9.710.2−10.310.8−10.911.4−11.512.0−12.112.6−12.713.2−13.313.8−13.9Percent range September projectionsJune projectionsNumber of participants2020246810121416183.0−3.13.6−3.74.2−4.34.8−4.95.4−5.56.0−6.16.6−6.77.2−7.37.8−7.98.4−8.59.0−9.19.6−9.710.2−10.310.8−10.911.4−11.512.0−12.112.6−12.713.2−13.313.8−13.9Percent rangeNumber of participants2021246810121416183.0−3.13.6−3.74.2−4.34.8−4.95.4−5.56.0−6.16.6−6.77.2−7.37.8−7.98.4−8.59.0−9.19.6−9.710.2−10.310.8−10.911.4−11.512.0−12.112.6−12.713.2−13.313.8−13.9Percent rangeNumber of participants2022246810121416183.0−3.13.6−3.74.2−4.34.8−4.95.4−5.56.0−6.16.6−6.77.2−7.37.8−7.98.4−8.59.0−9.19.6−9.710.2−10.310.8−10.911.4−11.512.0−12.112.6−12.713.2−13.313.8−13.9Percent rangeNumber of participants2023246810121416183.0−3.13.6−3.74.2−4.34.8−4.95.4−5.56.0−6.16.6−6.77.2−7.37.8−7.98.4−8.59.0−9.19.6−9.710.2−10.310.8−10.911.4−11.512.0−12.112.6−12.713.2−13.313.8−13.9Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 7________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inﬂation, 2020–23 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 246810121416180.3−0.40.5−0.60.7−0.80.9−1.01.1−1.21.3−1.41.5−1.61.7−1.81.9−2.02.1−2.22.3−2.4Percent range September projectionsJune projectionsNumber of participants2020246810121416180.3−0.40.5−0.60.7−0.80.9−1.01.1−1.21.3−1.41.5−1.61.7−1.81.9−2.02.1−2.22.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants2021246810121416180.3−0.40.5−0.60.7−0.80.9−1.01.1−1.21.3−1.41.5−1.61.7−1.81.9−2.02.1−2.22.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants2022246810121416180.3−0.40.5−0.60.7−0.80.9−1.01.1−1.21.3−1.41.5−1.61.7−1.81.9−2.02.1−2.22.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants2023246810121416180.3−0.40.5−0.60.7−0.80.9−1.01.1−1.21.3−1.41.5−1.61.7−1.81.9−2.02.1−2.22.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runPage 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inﬂation, 2020–23 Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 246810121416180.5−0.60.7−0.80.9−1.01.1−1.21.3−1.41.5−1.61.7−1.81.9−2.02.1−2.22.3−2.4Percent range September projectionsJune projectionsNumber of participants2020246810121416180.5−0.60.7−0.80.9−1.01.1−1.21.3−1.41.5−1.61.7−1.81.9−2.02.1−2.22.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants2021246810121416180.5−0.60.7−0.80.9−1.01.1−1.21.3−1.41.5−1.61.7−1.81.9−2.02.1−2.22.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants2022246810121416180.5−0.60.7−0.80.9−1.01.1−1.21.3−1.41.5−1.61.7−1.81.9−2.02.1−2.22.3−2.4Percent rangeNumber of participants2023Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2020–23 and over the longer run Note: Deﬁnitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 246810121416180.13−0.370.38−0.620.63−0.870.88−1.121.13−1.371.38−1.621.63−1.871.88−2.122.13−2.372.38−2.622.63−2.872.88−3.12Percent range September projectionsJune projectionsNumber of participants2020246810121416180.13−0.370.38−0.620.63−0.870.88−1.121.13−1.371.38−1.621.63−1.871.88−2.122.13−2.372.38−2.622.63−2.872.88−3.12Percent rangeNumber of participants2021246810121416180.13−0.370.38−0.620.63−0.870.88−1.121.13−1.371.38−1.621.63−1.871.88−2.122.13−2.372.38−2.622.63−2.872.88−3.12Percent rangeNumber of participants2022246810121416180.13−0.370.38−0.620.63−0.870.88−1.121.13−1.371.38−1.621.63−1.871.88−2.122.13−2.372.38−2.622.63−2.872.88−3.12Percent rangeNumber of participants2023246810121416180.13−0.370.38−0.620.63−0.870.88−1.121.13−1.371.38−1.621.63−1.871.88−2.122.13−2.372.38−2.622.63−2.872.88−3.12Percent rangeNumber of participantsLonger runPage 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Figure 4. Uncertainty and risks in economic projections 24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigher September projectionsJune projectionsNumber of participantsUncertainty about GDP growth24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupside September projectionsJune projectionsNumber of participantsRisks to GDP growth24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigherNumber of participantsUncertainty about the unemployment rate24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupsideNumber of participantsRisks to the unemployment rate24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigherNumber of participantsUncertainty about PCE inflation24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupsideNumber of participantsRisks to PCE inflation24681012141618LowerBroadlysimilarHigherNumber of participantsUncertainty about core PCE inflation24681012141618Weighted todownsideBroadlybalancedWeighted toupsideNumber of participantsRisks to core PCE inflationSummary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Percentage points Variable 2020 2021 2022 2023 Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.1 ±1.7 ±1.8 ±1.9 Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.3 ±1.1 ±1.6 ±1.9 Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.0 Short-term interest rates3 . . . ±0.5 ±1.7 ±2.3 ±2.7 NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 2000 through 2019 that were released in the fall by various private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump- tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Us- ing Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. anticipated progress in dealing with the disease and bet- ter-targeted measures in responding to the virus. Partic- ipants also pointed to a number of other risks, including the extent and timing of additional fiscal support, the magnitude of supply-side disruptions associated with postponements of in-class school openings and small business closings, the likelihood of elevated levels of business bankruptcies, and credit quality problems that could potentially curtail lending. Several participants also expressed concerns about global geopolitical devel- opments and related tensions as well as prolonged reces- sionary dynamics such as labor market scarring or infla- tion persistently undershooting the Committee’s longer- run goal. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts monetary policy in response to actual and prospective develop- ments over time in key economic variables—such as real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation— uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the fed- eral funds rate importantly reflects the uncertainties about the paths for these economic variables, along with other factors. As with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial. Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Forecast Uncertainty The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the presi- dents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform discus- sions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce eco- nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descrip- tions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen de- velopments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic out- come as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the econ- omy should they occur. Table 2 summarizes the average historical accu- racy of a range of forecasts, including those re- ported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those pre- pared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in ad- vance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real gross do- mestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attend- ing those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand within a range of 1.9 to 4.1 percent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the second year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the third year, and 1.1 to 4.9 percent in the fourth year. The cor- responding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second year, 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the fourth year. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty at- tached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typ- ical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2. That is, participants judge whether each eco- nomic variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attend- ing each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections. As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This uncer- tainty arises primarily because each participant’s as- sessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. The final line in ta- ble 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short- term interest rates. They suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the fed- eral funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of- year basis. However, the forecast errors should pro- vide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as addi- tional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. Summary of Economic Projections of the Meeting of September 15–16, 2020Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee November 4–5, 2020 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconfer- ence on Wednesday, November 4, 2020, at 9:00 a.m. and continued on Thursday, November 5, 2020, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Patrick Harker Robert S. Kaplan Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, and Michael Strine, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Sally Davies and Brian M. Doyle, Deputy Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Kurt F. Lewis, Ellen E. Meade, and Chiara Scotti, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Ron Feldman, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Board Members, Board of Governors Bank of Minneapolis James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Rochelle M. Edge, David E. Lebow, Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Mark L.J. Wright, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Marnie Gillis DeBoer, David López-Salido, and Min Wei, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Paul Wood, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Andrew Figura, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion on asset purchases. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Brian J. Bonis, Michiel De Pooter, Zeynep Senyuz,2 and Rebecca Zarutskie,2 Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Paul Lengermann, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Alex Richter, Senior Economist and Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Ryan Bush,2 Markets Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Matthias Paustian, Assistant Director and Chief, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Alyssa G. Anderson,2 Benjamin K. Johannsen,2 and Matthew Malloy,2 Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Penelope A. Beattie,2 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo, Dobrislav Dobrev, Anna Orlik, and Judit Temesvary,2 Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Arsenios Skaperdas,2 Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Lead Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Gregory L. Stefani, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Kartik B. Athreya, Joseph W. Gruber, Glenn D. Rudebusch, Daleep Singh, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Kansas City, San Francisco, New York, and St. Louis, respectively Spencer Krane, Antoine Martin,2 Paolo A. Pesenti, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,2 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, New York, New York, and New York, respectively Satyajit Chatterjee, Mark J. Jensen, Dina Marchioni,2 Matthew D. Raskin,2 and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Atlanta, New York, New York, and New York, respectively Daniel Cooper, Senior Economist and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- ket Operations The System Open Market Account (SOMA) manager first discussed developments in financial markets. Fi- nancial conditions were little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period and remained accommodative. Market participants suggested that evolving expectations for U.S. fiscal policy as well as stronger-than-expected economic data and corporate earnings reports helped support equity prices. Later in the intermeeting period, however, rising COVID-19 cases in Europe and the United States weighed on the outlook, and equity prices reversed some of their earlier gains. Implied volatility in the equity market moved higher during the intermeeting period, reflecting uncertainties associated with the U.S. election and the future path of fiscal policy as well as concerns about the trajectory of COVID-19 cases. Market participants’ expectations for the path of the fed- eral funds rate were little changed over the intermeeting period. In the Open Market Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants, respondents’ views on when the Committee will most likely start rais- ing the target range for the federal funds rate were cen- tered around 2024. Expectations for the economic con- ditions that will prevail when the FOMC first lifts the target range were little changed since the September sur- veys. Respondents to the Desk’s surveys generally expected the Federal Reserve’s purchases of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) to con- tinue at the current pace through the end of 2021 and then to slow in subsequent years, although there was a wide range of views about purchase amounts for 2022 and 2023. Market participants appeared increasingly fo- cused on how the Committee’s communications on as- set purchases might evolve. They expected those com- munications to place a greater emphasis on fostering ac- commodative financial conditions, and many noted the possibility that at some point the Committee might con- vey additional guidance about the future path of asset purchases. Some market participants expected the Com- mittee to eventually lengthen the weighted average ma- turity of the Federal Reserve’s purchases of Treasury se- curities. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The manager turned next to a discussion of financial market functioning, open market operations, and condi- tions in short-term funding markets. Markets for Treas- ury securities and agency MBS continued to function smoothly, with bid-ask spreads and a range of other mar- ket functioning indicators remaining near pre-pandemic levels. Weekly operations continued for agency com- mercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), with the Desk purchasing only modest amounts. Short-term dol- lar funding markets also continued to function smoothly over the period, and forward measures of funding rates were consistent with expectations for calm conditions over year-end. The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased modestly over the intermeeting period to $7.2 trillion, as growth in securities holdings was partially offset by a decline in U.S. dollar liquidity swaps outstanding. Outstanding balances for credit and liquidity facilities were little changed. The manager noted that market participants continued to view these facilities as important backstops that would support market functioning and the flow of credit should stresses reemerge. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Discussion on Asset Purchases Participants discussed the FOMC’s asset purchases, in- cluding the role they are playing in supporting the Com- mittee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. In their discussions, participants focused on the objec- tives of these purchases; considerations for assessing the appropriate pace and composition of asset purchases over time; communications regarding the future path of asset purchases; and the potential effects of higher levels of reserves, associated with the ongoing expansion in Federal Reserve asset holdings, on banks’ balance sheets and money market rates. Participants agreed that this discussion would be helpful for future assessments of the appropriate structure of the Committee’s asset pur- chases. While participants judged that immediate adjust- ments to the pace and composition of asset purchases were not necessary, they recognized that circumstances could shift to warrant such adjustments. Accordingly, participants saw the ongoing careful consideration of potential next steps for enhancing the Committee’s guid- ance for its asset purchases as appropriate. The participants’ discussion was preceded by staff presentations. The staff reviewed some key considera- tions relevant for conducting asset purchases in the cur- rent environment. The staff judged that the Commit- tee’s forward guidance on the federal funds rate, the ex- pansion of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings since March, and expectations for a further expansion all had contributed to a very low level of longer-term yields despite substantial Treasury debt issuance. The staff noted that financial market participants generally ex- pected the Committee to continue its net asset purchases at the current pace through next year and at a reduced pace in subsequent years. The staff discussed various changes the Committee could make to the structure of its purchases, including to their pace and composition as well as to the guidance the Committee has been provid- ing to the public about its future asset purchases. The staff discussed the structure of asset purchase programs of several foreign central banks and how they have evolved during the pandemic. Finally, the staff evaluated how higher levels of reserves associated with the ongo- ing expansion in the Federal Reserve’s asset holdings might influence banks’ balance sheets and money market rates and discussed the various tools that the Federal Re- serve has for managing money market rates in an envi- ronment with very high levels of reserves. In their discussion regarding the role of the Committee’s asset purchases, participants noted that these purchases have supported and sustained smooth market function- ing and helped foster accommodative financial condi- tions. With market functioning seen as having largely recovered, many participants indicated that the role of asset purchases had shifted more toward fostering ac- commodative financial conditions for households and businesses to support the Committee’s employment and inflation goals. Still, participants generally judged that asset purchases would continue to support smooth mar- ket functioning, and many judged that asset purchases helped provide insurance against risks that might reemerge in financial markets in an environment of high uncertainty. A few participants indicated that asset pur- chases could also help guard against undesirable upward pressure on longer-term rates that could arise, for exam- ple, from higher-than-expected Treasury debt issuance. Several participants noted the possibility that there may be limits to the amount of additional accommodation that could be provided through increases in the Federal Reserve’s asset holdings in light of the low level of longer-term yields, and they expressed concerns that a significant expansion in asset holdings could have unin- tended consequences. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 4–5, 2020Page 3 Participants commented on considerations related to the appropriate pace and composition of asset purchases. Participants generally saw the current pace and compo- sition as effective in fostering accommodative financial conditions. Participants noted that the Committee could provide more accommodation, if appropriate, by in- creasing the pace of purchases or by shifting its Treasury purchases to those with a longer maturity without in- creasing the size of its purchases. Alternatively, the Committee could provide more accommodation, if ap- propriate, by conducting purchases of the same pace and composition over a longer horizon. Pointing to the re- cently announced change in the Bank of Canada’s asset purchase program, several participants judged that the Committee could maintain its current degree of accom- modation by lengthening the maturity of the Commit- tee’s Treasury purchases while reducing the pace of pur- chases somewhat. In their view, such a change in the Committee’s purchase structure would have to be care- fully communicated to the public to avoid the misper- ception that the reduced pace of purchases represented a decline in the degree of accommodation. A few par- ticipants expressed concern that maintaining the current pace of agency MBS purchases could contribute to po- tential valuation pressures in housing markets. The September FOMC statement indicated that asset purchases will continue “over coming months,” and par- ticipants viewed this guidance for asset purchases as hav- ing served the Committee well so far. Most participants judged that the Committee should update this guidance at some point and implement qualitative outcome-based guidance that links the horizon over which the Commit- tee anticipates it would be conducting asset purchases to economic conditions. These participants indicated that updating the Committee’s guidance for asset purchases in this manner would help keep the market’s expectation for future asset purchases aligned with the Committee’s intentions. Some of these participants also saw such up- dated guidance as reinforcing the Committee’s commit- ment to fostering outcomes consistent with maximum employment and inflation that averages 2 percent over time. A few participants were hesitant to make changes in the near term to the guidance for asset purchases and pointed to considerable uncertainty about the economic outlook and the appropriate use of balance sheet policies given that uncertainty. Participants noted that it would be important for the Committee’s guidance for future asset purchases to be consistent with the Committee’s forward guidance for the federal funds rate so that the use of these tools would be well coordinated in terms of achieving the Commit- tee’s objectives. Most participants judged that the guid- ance for asset purchases should imply that increases in the Committee’s securities holdings would taper and cease sometime before the Committee would begin to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. A num- ber of participants highlighted the view that after net purchases cease there would likely be a period of time in which maturing assets would be reinvested to roughly maintain the size of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings. Participants commented on how a higher level of re- serves associated with the expansion in the Federal Re- serve’s asset holdings might affect the banking sector and money markets. A few participants raised concerns about the possibility that much higher levels of reserves might create pressure on banks’ balance sheets, includ- ing on regulatory ratios, or could potentially put undue downward pressure on money market rates. Most par- ticipants judged that the Federal Reserve had effective tools to address these circumstances. Some participants noted that, if needed, the Federal Reserve could consider various steps to manage the levels of short-term interest rates and the quantity of reserves, such as adjusting ad- ministered rates, expanding the overnight reverse repur- chase agreement program, or implementing a maturity extension program. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The coronavirus pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activity The in the United States and abroad. information available at the time of the November 4–5 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) had rebounded at a rapid rate in the third quarter but remained well below its level at the start of the year. in Labor market conditions September, although the pace of gains eased and employment continued to be well below its level at the beginning of the year. Consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) through September—had returned to its year- earlier pace but remained noticeably below the rates that were posted in January and February. improved further Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded strongly in September, but the gain was markedly below the even larger increases seen in previous months. Through Sep- tember, payroll employment had retraced only about half of the decline seen at the onset of the pandemic. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The unemployment rate moved down further to 7.9 per- cent in September. The unemployment rates for African Americans and Asians both decreased, but the unem- ployment rate for Hispanics was little changed, and each group’s rate remained well above the national average. In addition, the overall labor force participation rate de- clined, and the employment-to-population ratio rose only slightly. Initial claims for unemployment insurance continued to move lower, on net, through late October, and weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls con- structed by the Board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor ADP suggested that employment gains from mid-September to mid-October remained solid. The employment cost index (ECI) for total hourly labor compensation in the private sector, which likely had been less influenced than other hourly compensation measures by the concentration of recent job losses among lower-wage workers, rose 2.4 percent over the 12 months ending in September. This gain was a little smaller than the index’s year-earlier 12-month change; in addition, the 3-month changes in the ECI in June and September were noticeably below the average pace seen over the period from 2017 through 2019. Total PCE price inflation was 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in September and continued to be held down by relatively weak aggregate demand and the declines in consumer energy prices seen earlier in the year. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 1.5 percent over the same period, while the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price infla- tion constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 1.9 percent in September. On a monthly basis, in- flation was a little lower in September, largely reflecting slower goods price inflation. The latest readings on sur- vey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations moved lower, though each remained within the range in which it has fluctuated in recent years; in October, the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years fell back to the level that pre- vailed in early 2020, while in September the 3-year-ahead measure from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York retraced its August increase. Real PCE rose strongly in the third quarter, though the increase was not sufficient to return consumer spending to its pre-pandemic level. Real disposable personal in- come declined, reflecting a large reduction in govern- ment transfer payments. As a result, the personal saving rate moved sharply lower, though it was still elevated rel- ative to its 2019 average. The consumer sentiment measures from the Michigan survey and the Conference Board had moved higher, on net, since August; although both indexes stood above their April troughs, they re- mained well below their levels at the start of the year. Housing-sector activity advanced in the third quarter, with real residential investment and home sales both moving above their first-quarter levels. Activity in this sector was likely being supported by low interest rates, the sector’s ability to adjust business practices in re- sponse to social distancing, and pent-up demand follow- ing the widespread shutdowns earlier in the year. Business fixed investment expanded strongly, led by an outsized increase in third-quarter equipment spending. By contrast, spending on nonresidential structures con- tinued to move lower and was likely restrained by firms’ hesitation to commit to projects with lengthy times to completion and uncertain future returns as well as by the effect of lower oil prices on drilling investment. Growth in both total industrial production and manu- facturing output turned negative in September after hav- ing slowed markedly in August. Part of the softness in manufacturing production appeared to be attributable to pandemic-related delays in the motor vehicle industry’s model-year changeover, though subdued foreign de- mand and weaker demand from domestic energy pro- ducers were also likely acting to restrain factory output. As of September, manufacturing output had recovered roughly two-thirds of the drop seen earlier in the year. Total real government purchases declined in the third quarter. Federal nondefense purchases fell especially sharply, largely reflecting a step-down in lender pro- cessing fees associated with the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). In addition, real purchases by state and local governments declined further. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in September after widening in August. Both exports and imports continued to rebound from their collapse in the first half of the year. Goods imports fully recovered to their January level, with broad-based increases in August and September. In contrast, goods exports by Septem- ber recovered only two-thirds of their decline since Jan- uary despite brisk growth in exports of agricultural prod- ucts and industrial supplies. Services trade remained de- pressed, driven by the continued suspension of most in- ternational travel. Altogether, net exports made a sub- stantial negative contribution to real GDP growth in the third quarter. Economic activity abroad rebounded sharply in the third quarter following a rollback of pandemic-related re- strictions. GDP levels, however, generally remained well _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 4–5, 2020Page 5 below their pre-pandemic peaks, with China being a no- table exception. Domestic demand supported the re- covery, and in Asia there was also a strong rebound of exports, especially of electronics and, more recently, au- tos. Third-quarter growth was particularly rapid in those economies that experienced some of the deepest con- tractions in the second quarter, including France, Italy, and Spain among the advanced foreign economies (AFEs) and Mexico among the emerging market econo- mies. After falling through the end of the summer in many countries, inflation rates started to rise over the past two months but remained well below rates from early in the year. The rapid increase over recent weeks of new COVID-19 cases in several AFEs, especially in Europe, prompted governments to reintroduce restrictions to rein in this renewed wave of infections. In late October, the gov- ernments of several European countries—including England, France, and Germany—announced new na- tionwide restrictions (including the closures of bars and restaurants) and, in some cases, restrictions to the mo- bility of individuals within and across regions. Still, rel- ative to the spring, restrictions were noticeably less se- vere; factories, most businesses, and schools generally remained open. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Financial market sentiment was little changed over the intermeeting period against the backdrop of evolving U.S. election and fiscal outlooks, as well as rising COVID-19 cases in the United States and Europe. On net, the Treasury yield curve steepened modestly, corpo- rate bond spreads narrowed somewhat, and broad equity price indexes increased. Inflation compensation in- creased a little further, remaining close to pre-pandemic levels. Financing conditions for businesses with access to capital markets and households with high credit scores remained generally accommodative, although conditions remained tight or tightened somewhat for other borrowers. Yields on two-year nominal Treasury securities were lit- tle changed over the intermeeting period, while longer- term yields increased modestly, on net, reportedly re- flecting market participants’ reassessments of the elec- tion outcome and the outlook for fiscal policy. FOMC communications and macroeconomic data releases did not elicit material yield reactions. Measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) edged up, on net, remaining close to their pre-pandemic levels. This development reflected in part the recovery of TIPS market liquidity conditions from their stressed levels in the spring. However, both the 5-year and 5-to-10-year measures of inflation com- pensation remained near the lower ends of their histori- cal ranges. The expected path for the federal funds rate over the next few years, as implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes, was little changed, on net, since the September FOMC meeting and remained close to the effective lower bound (ELB) until the end of 2023. Sur- vey-based expectations favored the first increase in the federal funds rate to occur in 2024. Broad stock price indexes increased, on balance, over the intermeeting period amid volatility associated with market participants’ reactions to news on the U.S. elec- tion, the pandemic’s trajectory, and the fiscal policy out- look. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—increased some, on net, after briefly ris- ing sharply late in the intermeeting period. Spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treas- ury yields narrowed across the credit spectrum and stood somewhat below their historical median levels at the end of the intermeeting period. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period. Spreads on commer- cial paper (CP) and negotiable certificates of deposit across different tenors were little changed and remained at pre-pandemic levels. The outstanding level of nonfi- nancial CP continued to move down over the intermeet- ing period, reportedly driven by issuers’ relatively low appetite for CP funding in light of the availability of longer-term financing on attractive terms. September quarter-end effects were muted, and there was no credit outstanding through the Commercial Paper Funding Fa- cility by the end of the intermeeting period. Conditions in money market funds (MMFs) were also generally calm over the intermeeting period, and net yields of MMFs remained stable near historical lows. The effective federal funds rate stood at 9 basis points, unchanged from the average over the previous inter- meeting period. The Secured Overnight Financing Rate averaged 8 basis points, edging down from the previous intermeeting period amid a modest net decrease in Treasury bill issuance. The amount of Federal Reserve repurchase agreements outstanding remained at zero over the intermeeting period, as dealers were able to ob- tain more attractive rates in the private market. The Fed- eral Reserve increased holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS at the same pace as over the previous intermeeting period. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Investor sentiment abroad turned negative over the in- termeeting period amid rising COVID-19 case counts, newly adopted restrictions aimed at containing the spread of the virus, and indicators pointing to a slowing recovery in several foreign economies, particularly in the euro area. Uncertainty about additional U.S. fiscal stim- ulus and the outcome of the U.S. presidential election also caused some asset price volatility abroad. On net, most foreign equity indexes declined, option-implied volatility in the euro area increased a bit, and most AFE long-term sovereign yields fell. Overall, the broad dollar index was little changed over the intermeeting period. The dollar appreciated mod- estly against most AFE currencies except the Japanese yen and the British pound. Several Asian currencies, in- cluding the Chinese renminbi, the South Korean won, and the Taiwanese dollar, appreciated against the U.S. dollar amid improving growth prospects and low COVID-19 case counts. Most Latin American curren- cies (especially the Brazilian real) and the Turkish lira de- preciated against the U.S. dollar on concerns about fiscal and political prospects in Latin America and Turkey. Financing conditions in capital markets continued to be broadly accommodative over the intermeeting period, supported by low interest rates and high equity valua- tions. With historically low corporate bond yields, gross issuance of both investment- and speculative-grade cor- porate bonds remained solid in September, moderating from robust readings in August but staying close to the averages seen in recent years. Most of this issuance was reportedly intended to refinance existing debt. Gross in- stitutional leveraged loan issuance continued to pick up in September but remained below its average pace in 2019. Collateralized loan obligation issuance was strong in September, likely supporting robust investor demand for newly issued leveraged loans in the coming months. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations contin- ued to show signs of stabilization. The volume of down- grades to corporate bonds and leveraged loans fell to pre-pandemic levels through September. Corporate bond and leveraged loan defaults were low in August and September relative to their elevated readings in July. Market indicators of expected corporate bond and lev- eraged loan defaults remained somewhat elevated at above pre-pandemic levels, especially for lower-rated leveraged loan issuers. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans on banks’ bal- ance sheets continued to decline through September, re- flecting a mix of weak origination activity and the repay- ment of credit-line draws from earlier in the year. In the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported that stand- ards for C&I loans continued to tighten during the third quarter, although fewer banks reported tightening than in previous quarters. In addition, demand for C&I loans reportedly weakened in the third quarter. Financing conditions for small businesses remained tight as a result of the pandemic. Small business loan origina- tions dropped off sharply in August after a temporary boost from PPP distributions over the summer. At the same time, small businesses’ liquidity needs were high and appeared likely to increase further, with the most re- cent Census Bureau Small Business Pulse Survey point- ing to a majority of small businesses having no more than two months of cash on hand and many small busi- nesses anticipating some need for additional financial as- sistance in the next six months. However, the uncer- tainty surrounding earning prospects was reportedly making many business owners less willing to take on debt at prevailing terms. Small business loan perfor- mance generally deteriorated further over the intermeet- ing period. For commercial real estate (CRE) financed through cap- ital markets, financing conditions remained accommo- dative over the intermeeting period. Spreads on agency CMBS were narrow, and issuance was very strong in September. Spreads on triple-A non-agency CMBS, which were already within their pre-pandemic range in August, moved down further in September and early October, while non-agency issuance remained relatively subdued in September. In contrast, CRE loan growth at banks decelerated in the third quarter, while standards for CRE loans tightened further, according to the Octo- ber SLOOS. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were little changed over the intermeeting period. Mort- gage rates remained near historical lows, supporting high volumes of both home-purchase and refinancing origi- nations. Credit continued to flow to higher-score bor- rowers meeting standard conforming loan criteria, while it remained tight for borrowers with lower credit scores and for nonstandard mortgage products. Residential real estate loans on banks’ balance sheets declined, and the October SLOOS suggested that lending standards tightened for all mortgage types. Mortgage forbearance rates continued their downward trend, and the rate of new delinquencies remained low. In consumer credit markets, conditions remained ac- commodative for borrowers with relatively strong credit _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 4–5, 2020Page 7 scores but continued to be tight for borrowers with sub- prime credit scores. Banks in the October SLOOS indi- cated that standards tightened and demand was little changed, on balance, across consumer loan types follow- ing a sharp contraction in demand in the second quarter. Credit card balances continued to decline through the third quarter, with gains in balances for account holders with prime credit scores offset by declines in those for nonprime accounts. Interest rates on existing accounts were little changed and remained below pre-crisis levels, while interest rates on new accounts to nonprime bor- rowers remained elevated. Auto loan balances increased solidly for prime and near-prime borrowers but declined for subprime borrowers. Auto loan interest rates in- creased but stayed below pre-pandemic levels. Condi- tions in the asset-backed securities market remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period. The staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system. The staff judged that, accounting for low interest rates, asset valuations ap- peared moderate, with measures of compensation for risk generally in the middle of their historical ranges. However, uncertainty regarding the pandemic and eco- nomic outlook has been high, and the risk of sizable de- clines in asset prices, should adverse shocks materialize, has remained significant. CRE prices had started to de- cline in some sectors, while market conditions, including rising vacancies and declining rents, pointed to a risk of further drops, especially in severely affected sectors. The staff assessed vulnerabilities associated with house- hold and business borrowing as notable. Household fi- nances had weakened with the economic downturn, and some households could find debt levels burdensome go- ing forward. Business debt levels were high before the pandemic, and the ability of some businesses to service these obligations will depend on the course of the eco- nomic recovery. The staff assessed vulnerabilities aris- ing from financial leverage as moderate. While the bank- ing sector has been resilient to recent developments, banks’ profitability, as well as that of a range of financial institutions, could be affected by future losses, the weak- ening of the economic outlook relative to pre-pandemic conditions, and low interest rates. With regard to fund- ing risks, the staff highlighted that structural vulnerabili- ties in markets for short-term funding and corporate bonds remained present. Emergency facilities were viewed as critical in restoring market functioning and continued to serve as important backstops. The staff also summarized near-term risks to financial stability identified in outreach to the public in recent months, in- cluding concerns associated with the outlook for the pandemic and business defaults. Staff Economic Outlook In the U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the November FOMC meeting, the rate of real GDP growth and the pace of declines in the unemployment rate over the second half of this year were similar to in the September forecast despite material those revisions to several assumptions influencing the outlook along with incoming data that were, on balance, better than expected. In particular, in the absence of clear progress toward an agreement on further fiscal stimulus, the staff removed the assumption that an additional tranche of fiscal policy support would be enacted. Although this lack of additional fiscal support was expected to cause significant hardships for a number of households, the staff now assessed that the savings cushion accumulated by other households would be enough to allow total consumption to be largely maintained through year-end. Hence, as in the September projection, the staff continued to expect a rapid but partial rebound in activity over the second half of the year following the unprecedented contraction in the spring. The inflation forecast for the rest of the year was revised up slightly in response to incoming readings on inflation that were, on balance, higher than expected. Nevertheless, inflation was still projected to finish the year at a relatively subdued level, reflecting substantial margins of slack in labor and product markets and the large declines in consumer energy prices seen earlier in the year. In the staff’s medium-term projection, the assumption that significant additional fiscal support would not be enacted pointed to a lower trajectory for aggregate demand going forward. However, recent data on tax receipts also suggested that the fiscal positions of states and localities had deteriorated less than expected, which led the staff to boost the projected path of state and local government purchases. Hence, with monetary policy remain highly accommodative and assumed social-distancing measures expected to ease further, the staff continued to project that real GDP over the medium term would outpace potential, leading to a considerable further decline in the unemployment rate. The resulting take-up of economic slack was in turn expected to cause inflation to increase gradually, and the inflation rate was projected to moderately overshoot 2 percent for some time in the years beyond 2023 as monetary policy remained accommodative. to Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The staff continued to observe that the uncertainty related to the future course of the pandemic and its consequences for the economy was high. The staff also continued to view the risks to the economic outlook as tilted to the downside, with the latest data suggesting an increased probability of a resurgence in the disease. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants noted that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Eco- nomic activity and employment had continued to re- cover but remained well below their levels at the begin- ning of the year. Weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices had been holding down consumer price infla- tion. Overall financial conditions remained accommo- dative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economy’s medium-term outlook. Participants observed that the economy had registered a rapid though incomplete rebound, with third-quarter real GDP rising at an annual rate of 33 percent, reflect- ing gains across consumer spending, housing-sector ac- tivity, and business equipment investment. In recent months, however, the pace of improvement had moder- ated, with slower growth expected for the fourth quarter. Participants noted that economic activity thus far had re- covered faster than had been expected earlier in the year. Household spending on goods, especially durable goods, had been strong and had moved above its pre-pandemic level. Participants commented that the rebound in con- sumer spending was due in part to federal stimulus pay- ments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided essential support to many households. Partic- ipants viewed accommodative monetary policy as also contributing to gains in durable goods and residential in- vestment as well as the surge in home sales. In contrast, participants noted that consumer outlays for services were increasing more slowly than for durable goods, par- ticularly for items such as air travel, hotel accommoda- tions, and restaurant meals, which had been significantly disrupted by voluntary and mandated social-distancing measures. Participants generally expected the strength in household spending to continue, especially for dura- ble goods and residential investment. A few participants noted that households’ balance sheets generally ap- peared healthy and an unwinding of the large pool of household savings accumulated during the pandemic could provide greater-than-anticipated momentum to consumer spending over coming months. However, several participants expressed concern that, in the ab- sence of additional fiscal support, lower- and moderate- income households might need to reduce their spending sharply when their savings were exhausted. A couple of these participants noted reports from their banking con- tacts that households appeared to be rapidly exhausting funds they received from fiscal relief programs. Participants noted that business equipment investment had also picked up. A few participants expected the mo- mentum in investment to extend into next year as the economic recovery continued, while a couple of other participants noted that many businesses in their Districts were deferring longer-term commitments because of heighted uncertainty about the economic outlook. The recovery was viewed as unevenly distributed across in- dustries. While many business contacts, particularly those in the durable goods or housing industries, re- ported progress in adapting to the pandemic or im- proved business conditions, others—especially those with ties to small businesses and the hospitality, aviation, and nonresidential construction industries—were still seeing very difficult circumstances. Contacts reported improved conditions in the agricultural sector, boosted by strong demand from China as well as domestic etha- nol production, higher crop prices, and federal aid pay- ments. Looking ahead, some business contacts ex- pressed concerns that many households and businesses were currently in a weaker position to weather additional economic shocks than they had been at the beginning of the pandemic. Participants observed that labor market conditions had continued to improve in recent months, with roughly half of the 22 million jobs lost over March and April having been regained. The unemployment rate had de- clined further, and the employment gains since the spring were generally seen as larger than anticipated. Business contacts in a couple of Districts—particularly those in the manufacturing, health-care, and technology sectors—reported having trouble hiring workers for rea- sons likely related to virus cases or workers’ need to pro- vide childcare. Several participants noted that the de- cline in the unemployment rate in recent months had been accompanied by a fall in the labor force participa- tion rate, particularly among those with a high school education or lower and among women. Although the number of workers on temporary layoff had fallen _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 4–5, 2020Page 9 sharply, the number of permanent job losers had contin- ued to rise. Most participants commented that the pace of labor market improvement was likely to moderate go- ing forward. A couple of them noted that many busi- nesses in industries severely affected by the pandemic were downsizing or that some businesses were focused on cutting costs or increasing productivity, including through automation. Many participants observed that high rates of job losses had been especially prevalent among lower-wage workers, particularly in the services sector, and among women, African Americans, and His- panics. A few participants noted that these trends, if slow to reverse, could exacerbate racial, gender, and other social-economic disparities. In addition, a slow job market recovery would cause particular hardship for those with less educational attainment, less access to childcare or broadband, or greater need for retraining. In their comments about inflation, participants noted that some consumer prices had increased more quickly than expected in recent months but that broader price trends were still quite soft. The upturn in consumer price inflation was primarily attributed to price increases in sectors where the pandemic had induced stronger de- mand, such as consumer durables. In contrast, services price inflation remained softer than pre-pandemic rates, as prices for the categories most affected by social dis- tancing, such as accommodations and airfares, contin- ued to be very depressed and housing services inflation moderated. Several participants commented on the un- usually large relative price movements caused by the pandemic and the considerable uncertainty as to how long these price changes would persist. Participants noted that financial conditions were gener- ally accommodative and that actions by the Federal Re- serve, including the establishment of emergency lending facilities with the approval of and, in some cases, provi- sion of equity investments by the Treasury, were sup- porting the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities. While these actions were viewed as con- tributing to accommodative financial conditions, partic- ipants noted important differences in credit availability across borrowers. In particular, financing conditions eased further for residential mortgage borrowers and for large corporations that were able to access capital mar- kets, but surveys of credit availability indicated that bank lending conditions tightened further. A few participants noted that the financing conditions for small businesses were especially worrisome, as the PPP had ended and the prospect for additional fiscal support remained un- certain. They pointed to the most recent Census Bureau Small Business Pulse Survey, in which more than half of the respondents reported having no more than two months of cash on hand. Participants continued to see the uncertainty surround- ing the economic outlook as quite elevated, with the path of the economy highly dependent on the course of the virus; on how individuals, businesses, and public officials responded to it; and on the effectiveness of public health measures to address it. Participants cited several down- side risks that could threaten the recovery. While an- other broad economic shutdown was seen as unlikely, participants remained concerned about the possibility of a further resurgence of the virus that could undermine the recovery. The majority of participants also saw the risk that current and expected fiscal support for house- holds, businesses, and state and local governments might not be sufficient to sustain activity levels in those sectors, while a few participants noted that additional fiscal stim- ulus that was larger than anticipated could be an upside risk. Some participants commented that the recent surge in virus cases in Europe and the reimposition of re- strictions there could lead to a slowdown in economic activity in the euro area and have negative spillover ef- fects on the U.S. recovery. Some participants raised con- cerns regarding the longer-run effects of the pandemic, including sectoral restructurings that could slow employ- ment growth or an acceleration of technological disrup- tions that could be limiting the pricing power of some firms. A number of participants commented on various poten- tial risks to financial stability. A few participants noted that the banking system showed considerable resilience through the end of the third quarter, and a few observed that this resilience partly reflected stronger-than-ex- pected balance sheets of their customers, with delin- quency rates declining or showing only moderate in- creases. Moreover, capital positions and loan loss re- serves for large banks were higher than before the pan- demic. Several participants emphasized the need to en- sure that banks continue to maintain strong capital lev- els, as lower levels of capital are typically associated with tighter credit availability from banks. Several partici- pants commented on the vulnerabilities witnessed dur- ing the March selloff in the Treasury market. The sub- stantial maturity and liquidity transformations under- taken by some nonbank financial institutions—such as prime MMFs and corporate bond and bank loan mutual funds—were also discussed. A couple of participants expressed concerns that a prolonged period of low in- terest rates and highly accommodative financial market conditions could lead to excessive risk-taking, which in Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ turn could result in elevated firm bankruptcies and sig- nificant employment losses in the next economic down- turn. A few participants noted that climate change poses important challenges to financial stability and welcomed analysis of climate change as both a source of shocks and an underlying vulnerability. A couple of participants commented that the actions taken by the Federal Re- serve to support the economy and achieve its mandated goals also supported financial stability. Relatedly, several participants emphasized the important roles various sec- tion 13(3) facilities played in restoring financial market confidence and supporting financial stability; they noted that these facilities were still serving as an important backstop in financial markets. A few participants noted that it was important to extend them beyond year-end. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed the Federal Reserve’s commit- ment to using its full range of tools in order to support the U.S. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the Committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. Participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic ac- tivity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. In light of this assessment, all partic- ipants judged that maintaining an accommodative stance of monetary policy was essential to foster economic re- covery and to achieve the Committee’s long-run 2 per- cent inflation objective. Participants remarked that the Committee’s action in September to provide more explicit outcome-based for- ward guidance for the federal funds rate had been an im- portant step to affirm the Committee’s strong commit- ment to the goals and strategy articulated in its revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. Several participants noted that they were en- couraged by evidence that suggested that market partic- ipants’ expectations of the economic conditions that would likely prevail at the time of liftoff seemed broadly consistent with the Committee’s forward guidance and revised consensus statement. Participants agreed that monetary policy was providing substantial accommodation, and most concurred that, with the federal funds rate at the ELB, much of that ac- commodation was due to the Committee’s forward guid- ance and increases in securities holdings. They judged that the current stance of monetary policy remained ap- propriate, as both employment and inflation remained well short of the Committee’s goals and the uncertainty about the course of the virus and the outlook for the economy continued to be very elevated. Participants viewed the resurgence of COVID-19 cases in the United States and abroad as a downside risk to the recovery; a few participants noted that diminished odds for further significant fiscal support also increased downside risks and added to uncertainty about the economic outlook. Regarding asset purchases, participants judged that it would be appropriate over coming months for the Fed- eral Reserve to increase its holdings of Treasury securi- ties and agency MBS at least at the current pace. These actions would continue to help sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. Many participants judged that the Committee might want to enhance its guidance for asset purchases fairly soon. Most participants fa- vored moving to qualitative outcome-based guidance for asset purchases that links the horizon over which the Committee anticipates it would be conducting asset pur- chases to economic conditions. A few participants were hesitant to make changes in the near term to the guid- ance for asset purchases and pointed to considerable un- certainty about the economic outlook and the appropri- ate use of balance sheet policies given that uncertainty. Discussion on Recommended Changes to the Sum- mary of Economic Projections Participants considered two recommendations from the subcommittee on communications for changes to the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) that would enhance the information provided to the public. These recommendations included accelerating the release of the full set of SEP exhibits from three weeks after the corresponding FOMC meeting, when the minutes of that meeting are released, to the day of the policy deci- sion and adding new charts that display a time series of diffusion indexes for participants’ judgments of uncer- tainty and risks. With these recommendations, the writ- ten summary of the projections that has been included as an addendum to the minutes of the corresponding FOMC meeting would be discontinued. Most of the participants who commented noted that re- leasing all SEP materials at the time of the postmeeting statement would provide greater context for the policy decision, highlight the risk-management factors relevant for the decision, or further emphasize the degree of un- certainty around participants’ modal projections. Some who commented noted that the SEP serves a valuable role in illustrating how participants’ policy assessments _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 4–5, 2020Page 11 respond to changes in the economic outlook. Most par- ticipants who commented suggested that it would be useful to continue thinking about options for refining the SEP. Participants unanimously supported the rec- ommended changes and agreed that they should be im- plemented beginning in December. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. They noted that economic activity and employment had con- tinued to recover but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year, and that weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices had been holding down con- sumer price inflation. Overall financial conditions re- in part reflecting policy mained accommodative, measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this chal- lenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employ- ment and price-stability goals. Members also stated that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus. In addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and was posing considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. All members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the Committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation running persistently below this longer- run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expecta- tions remain well anchored at 2 percent. Members ex- pected to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until those outcomes were achieved. All members agreed to maintain the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range un- til labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employ- ment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, members agreed that over coming months it would be appropriate for the Federal Reserve to increase its holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market func- tioning and help foster accommodative financial condi- tions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to house- holds and businesses. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Members also agreed that, in as- sessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective November 6, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to:   Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. Increase the System Open Market Ac- count holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at the current pace. Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by ad- ditional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) as needed to sustain smooth func- tioning of markets for these securities.  Conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar funding markets.  Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-coun- terparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS.  Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate set- tlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. The COVID-19 pandemic is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Economic activity and employment have continued to re- cover but remain well below their levels at the beginning of the year. Weaker demand and ear- lier declines in oil prices have been holding down consumer price inflation. Overall finan- cial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the econ- omy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The path of the economy will depend signifi- cantly on the course of the virus. The ongoing public health crisis will continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running per- sistently below this longer-run goal, the Com- mittee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Com- mittee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and in- flation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, over coming months the Federal Re- serve will increase its holdings of Treasury secu- rities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth mar- ket functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: None. Ms. Daly voted as alternate member at this meeting. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. The Board of Governors also voted unan- imously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective No- vember 6, 2020. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, December 15– 16, 2020. The meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on No- vember 5, 2020. Notation Votes By notation vote completed on September 30, 2020, the Committee unanimously approved the selection of Tre- vor Reeve to serve as economist and Rochelle Edge to serve as associate economist, effective October 1, 2020. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 4–5, 2020Page 13 By notation vote completed on October 6, 2020, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 15–16, 2020. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee December 15–16, 2020 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconference on Tuesday, December 15, 2020, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, December 16, 2020, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Patrick Harker Robert S. Kaplan Neel Kashkari Loretta J. Mester Randal K. Quarles Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, and Helen E. Mucciolo,2 Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Michael Dotsey, Rochelle M. Edge, Marc Giannoni, William Wascher, and Mark L.J. Wright, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback,3 Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,4 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Margie Shanks, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Sally Davies and Brian M. Doyle, Deputy Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Kurt F. Lewis, Ellen E. Meade, and Chiara Scotti, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Eric M. Engen and John J. Stevens, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Jane E. Ihrig, Don H. Kim, and Edward Nelson, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Brett Berger,4 Senior Adviser, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Elected as an Alternate by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, effective November 11, 2020. 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 4 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Elizabeth K. Kiser, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Eric C. Engstrom, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Norman J. Morin, Karen M. Pence, and John M. Roberts, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,4 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Brian J. Bonis and Dan Li, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors; Lubomir Petrasek, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Heather A. Wiggins,4 Group Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo and Erin E. Ferris, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Kyungmin Kim4 and Arsenios Skaperdas,4 Senior Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Courtney Demartini,4 Lead Financial Institution and Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Lead Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Becky C. Bareford, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Kartik B. Athreya, Joseph W. Gruber, Sylvain Leduc, Anna Paulson, Daleep Singh, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Kansas City, San Francisco, Chicago, New York, and St. Louis, respectively Todd E. Clark, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Jonathan P. McCarthy, Matthew Nemeth,4 Giovanni Olivei, Rania Perry,4 Matthew D. Raskin,4 Jonathan L. Willis, and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, New York, Boston, New York, New York, Atlanta, and New York, respectively Robert Lerman,4 Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Lisa Stowe,4 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) turned first to a discussion of financial market developments. Market sentiment improved over the pe- riod, as reduced uncertainty related to the U.S. election and positive vaccine news outweighed the anticipated ef- fect of the ongoing surge in the pandemic. U.S. equity price indexes reached all-time highs, with the largest gains registered in sectors that have underperformed during the pandemic. Corporate credit spreads tight- ened, most notably among lower-rated firms and in sec- tors most affected by social distancing measures result- ing from the pandemic. Longer-term Treasury yields rose modestly, driven by increases in inflation compen- sation. The positive vaccine news also supported risk sentiment abroad, leading many global equity price in- dexes to advance and the U.S. dollar to depreciate fur- ther. Market participants had highlighted that uncertainty nevertheless remained high and had pointed to several prominent risks to the economic outlook. These risks included the possibility that the vaccine rollout might not proceed as smoothly as anticipated, the potential for adverse developments in negotiations concerning the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European Un- ion, and the potential for deterioration in already strained sectors, such as those involving small businesses and certain segments of commercial real estate (CRE). With regard to market expectations concerning the pol- icy outlook, responses to the Open Market Desk surveys of dealers and market participants suggested that views on the most likely timing of the next increase in the tar- get range for the federal funds rate coalesced further around the first half of 2024. Survey responses contin- ued to indicate median expectations of headline personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation above 2 per- cent and an unemployment rate of around 4 percent at Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the time of the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate. A majority of Desk survey respond- ents indicated that they expected the Committee to re- vise its guidance on asset purchases at the current meet- ing, with many noting that they anticipated the an- nouncement of some form of qualitative, outcome- based guidance tied to inflation, the unemployment rate, or both. Median Desk survey responses continued to suggest expectations that purchases would begin to slow in the first half of 2022 and cease altogether in 2023. The size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased to around $7.3 trillion over the intermeeting period, driven by growth in securities holdings. The Desk con- ducted purchases to increase holdings of Treasury secu- rities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at the minimum pace directed by the FOMC, as markets for these securities continued to function smoothly. News that CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) funding would not be available to support new activity in section 13(3) facilities after the end of the year had only a modest effect on financial markets. New activity remained limited across most Federal Reserve funding operations and section 13(3) fa- cilities, although the Municipal Liquidity Facility and the Main Street Lending Program saw growing usage over the period, with more take-up expected before their scheduled year-end termination. The manager discussed a proposal to extend the tempo- rary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements as well as the temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Mone- tary Authorities) Repo Facility through September 2021. The path to a complete economic recovery remained un- certain across the globe, particularly for many emerging market countries, underscoring the need for backstops that could address potential market stresses and prevent spillovers from reemerging. Keeping these arrange- ments in place would contribute to sustaining improve- ments in global dollar funding markets and to the con- tinued smooth functioning of the U.S. Treasury securi- ties market. Under the proposal, provided that the Com- mittee had no objections, the Chair would approve the extension of the temporary liquidity swap lines following the meeting. The extensions of the swap and FIMA re- purchase agreement (repo) arrangements would be an- nounced following this meeting. Market participants generally anticipated calm money market conditions through year-end, and the premiums paid for dollar funding crossing year-end generally were below those observed in recent years. Money market fu- tures also indicated expectations of short-term rates moving down modestly in coming months, in light of anticipated further increases in aggregate reserve bal- ances and a moderation in Treasury bill supply. The manager anticipated that administered rates and the overnight reverse repo program would be effective tools for maintaining control of overnight money market rates. By unanimous vote, the Committee voted to approve a resolution that extended through September 30, 2021, the expiration of a temporary repo facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (FIMA Repo Fa- cility).5 Secretary’s note: The Chair subsequently pro- vided approval to the Desk, following the pro- cedures in the Authorization for Foreign Cur- rency Operations, to extend the expiration of the temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines through September 30, 2021. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activ- ity in the United States and abroad. The information available at the time of the December 15–16 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) was continuing to recover in the fourth quarter, but at a more moderate pace than its rapid third-quarter rate, and that the level of real GDP remained well below its level at the start of 2020. Labor market conditions improved further over October and November, although employ- ment continued to be well below its level at the begin- ning of the year. Consumer price inflation through Oc- tober—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the PCE price index—remained notably below the rates seen in early 2020. Total nonfarm payroll employment continued to in- crease solidly over October and November, though the rate of monthly job gains was more moderate than the substantial third-quarter pace. Through November, 5 The approved FIMA Desk Resolution, which updates the July 2020 resolution with a new expiration date, is available along with other Committee organizational documents at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_au- thorizations.htm. Minutes of the Meeting of December 15–16, 2020Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ payroll employment had regained somewhat more than half of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. The unemployment rate moved down further and stood at 6.7 percent in November. The unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics each declined but re- mained well above the national average. Both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to- population ratio in November were above their levels of two months earlier. The four-week moving average of initial claims for unemployment insurance was only slightly lower in early December than it had been in late October. Weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff using data provided by the payroll processor ADP suggested that the four-week average of private employment gains in early December was lower than it was in mid-November. Both the 12-month change in average hourly earnings for all employees through November and the four- quarter change in total labor compensation per hour in the business sector through the third quarter continued to be dominated by changes in the composition of the workforce. The substantial employment losses over the past year were most significant among lower-wage work- ers—a situation that had led to outsized increases in these average measures of earnings and compensation that were not indicative of tight labor market conditions. Total PCE price inflation was 1.2 percent over the 12 months ending in October, and it continued to be held down by relatively weak aggregate demand and the declines in consumer energy prices seen earlier in 2020. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 1.4 percent over the same period, while the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price infla- tion constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 1.7 percent in October. In November, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 1.2 percent, while core CPI inflation was 1.6 percent over the same period. The latest readings on survey- based measures of longer-run inflation expectations edged up, though each remained within the range in which it has fluctuated in recent years; in November and early December, the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years was slightly above its level in October, while the 3-year-ahead measure produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York rose a bit in November. Real PCE rose strongly in October, though at a more moderate pace than in the third quarter. Real disposable personal income declined in October, reflecting a large in government transfer payments, even reduction though wage and salary income continued to climb. As a result, the personal saving rate moved lower, though it continued to be notably above its 2019 average. In No- vember, the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate PCE, along with the rate of light motor vehicle sales, stepped down, possibly reflecting the ef- fects on consumer spending of renewed social- distancing measures and concerns about the resurgent pandemic. Consumer sentiment, as measured by both the Michigan survey and the Conference Board, moved somewhat lower, on net, since October, although both indexes were still above their April troughs. Housing-sector activity advanced further, on balance, in October, supported in part by low interest rates. Starts and construction permits for single-family homes con- tinued to rise, while starts of multi-family units moved sideways. Sales of existing homes increased solidly, though new home sales were roughly flat. Business fixed investment appeared to be expanding fur- ther, on net, in the fourth quarter following an outsized third-quarter increase. Nominal shipments of nonde- fense capital goods excluding aircraft rose strongly in October, and new orders for these capital goods contin- ued to advance. By contrast, nominal spending on non- residential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector declined further in October. The number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending on structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to move up somewhat through early December, although the number of rigs in operation was still subdued, reflecting the effect of low oil prices on drilling investment. Industrial production rose strongly over October and November, led by gains in manufacturing output, but production was still below its February pre-pandemic level. The pickup in the production of motor vehicles and related parts was particularly strong in November. Output in the mining sector—which includes crude oil and natural gas drilling and extraction—increased, on net, over October and November. Total real government purchases appeared to be declin- ing moderately, on balance, in the fourth quarter. Fed- eral defense spending continued to rise in October and November, although federal employment declined with the layoff of temporary census workers. State and local government payrolls decreased in October and Novem- ber, and nominal state and local construction expendi- tures in October were somewhat below their third-quar- ter level. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in October. Both imports and exports continued to re- bound from their collapse in the first half of the year. Goods imports in October rose above their January level after several months of strong growth. Goods exports, however, had only recovered three-fourths of their de- cline since January despite brisk growth in agricultural exports. Services trade remained depressed, driven by the continued suspension of most international travel. After a strong rebound in the third quarter, foreign eco- nomic growth appeared to slow sharply in recent months. The resurgence of coronavirus infections in Europe and Canada prompted governments to reintro- duce social-distancing restrictions, leading to a fall in measures of mobility and services activity. Even so, with restrictions less severe and more targeted than in the spring, the hit to economic activity looked to be more limited. Economic growth appeared to hold up better in several emerging Asian economies. In these econo- mies, effective virus control was supporting domestic demand, while strong external demand boosted exports. Inflationary pressures remained subdued in most foreign economies amid substantial economic slack. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Financial market sentiment improved over the inter- meeting period, boosted by news of forthcoming COVID-19 vaccines and reduced uncertainty following the U.S. election that outweighed concerns regarding the continued rise in COVID-19 cases and the potential ef- fects of ensuing restrictions. Corporate bond spreads narrowed, and major global equity price indexes rose on net. The prospect of additional fiscal stimulus likely contributed to a steeper U.S. Treasury yield curve, in- creased inflation compensation, and broad dollar depre- ciation. Financing conditions for businesses able to ac- cess capital markets and households possessing high credit scores remained accommodative and eased a bit further in some sectors, but conditions for borrowers dependent on bank financing remained tight. Yields on 2-year nominal Treasury securities were little changed since the November FOMC meeting, while 10- and 30-year yields rose moderately. Market partici- pants attributed the increases in longer-term yields pri- marily to greater optimism about the economic outlook, due to the forthcoming availability of effective vaccines and renewed fiscal stimulus negotiations. Near-dated option-implied volatility on the 10-year Treasury futures contract declined to historic lows. The rise in longer- term Treasury yields was concentrated in inflation com- pensation. The 5-year and 5-to-10-year measures of in- flation compensation based on Treasury Inflation Pro- tected Securities rose above their pre-pandemic levels. The expected path of the federal funds rate, based on a straight read of overnight index swap rates, remained close to the effective lower bound through mid-2023. Survey-based measures indicated that market expecta- tions regarding the federal funds rate target range did not show a tightening until 2024. Broad stock price indexes increased over the intermeet- ing period, led by steep stock price gains in cyclical sec- tors and buoyed by the prospect of successful vaccines and lower post-election uncertainty. One-month S&P 500 option-implied volatility—the VIX—declined, re- versing a pre-election increase. Consistent with the op- timism driving stock prices, spreads of corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury yields nar- rowed markedly across the credit spectrum, most nota- bly for debt securities of the lowest credit quality firms. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period. Spreads on commer- cial paper (CP) and negotiable certificates of deposit across different tenors were little changed, on net, and remained around pre-pandemic levels despite continued outflows from prime money market funds (MMFs) and the coming year-end. CP issuance was robust over the intermeeting period across the different tenors. With the yields of prime MMFs approaching those of government MMFs, assets under management (AUM) of prime MMFs declined moderately, while AUM of government MMFs were little changed. Net yields of prime and gov- ernment MMFs both remained near historically low lev- els. The intermeeting averages of the effective federal funds rate and the Secured Overnight Financing Rate remained unchanged from the previous intermeeting period aver- ages, at 9 basis points and 8 basis points, respectively. Term and forward repo market quotes indicated muted year-end funding pressure amid ample liquidity condi- tions. The Federal Reserve maintained its pace of pur- chases of Treasury securities and agency MBS, and Fed- eral Reserve repos outstanding remained at zero over the intermeeting period. Investor sentiment abroad improved over the intermeet- ing period, as favorable news on COVID-19 vaccines and the resolution of uncertainty regarding the U.S. elec- tion apparently outweighed concerns about another surge in COVID-19 cases and the resulting adoption of tighter social-distancing restrictions in many countries. Minutes of the Meeting of December 15–16, 2020Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ On balance, prices of global risky assets increased nota- bly, implied volatility dropped sharply, and the dollar de- preciated against most currencies. Most advanced for- eign economy sovereign yields were little changed, on net, as policymakers in several countries announced ad- ditional actions aimed at maintaining accommodative fi- nancial conditions. Financing conditions in capital markets continued to be broadly accommodative, supported by low interest rates and high equity valuations. With historically low corpo- rate bond yields, gross issuance of both investment- and speculative-grade bonds remained solid in October. Much of the recent issuance was intended to refinance existing debt. Gross institutional leveraged loan issu- ance increased substantially in October for both new loans and refinancing. Seasoned equity offerings in Oc- tober and November were similar to the typical volumes observed in previous years, though equity raised through initial public offerings moderated somewhat from the robust rate of issuance in September. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans outstanding on banks’ balance sheets contracted in October and November, reflecting the continued paydown of loan balances and the start of Paycheck Protection Program loan forgiveness activity. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations contin- ued to show signs of stabilization. Although the volume of nonfinancial corporate bond downgrades outpaced upgrades somewhat in October and November, nonfi- nancial corporate bond defaults continued to decline. The rate of leveraged loan defaults was largely un- changed in October, albeit at somewhat elevated levels. Market indicators of future default expectations for cor- porate bonds fell slightly but remained above their pre- pandemic levels. In the municipal bond market, financ- ing conditions remained accommodative. Issuance of state and local government debt moderated in Novem- ber after all-time high issuance in October, and market- based measures of state credit quality were little changed on net. Financing conditions for small businesses remained tight, although some indicators suggested that they might have improved a bit. Data provided by the Fed- eral Reserve Small Business Lending Survey showed that standards for small businesses tightened, on net, over the third quarter, consistent with the most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Prac- tices. Small business loan originations ticked up in Oc- tober to a level near that seen in the same period last year. Short-term delinquencies and defaults remained relatively elevated but significantly lower than the levels observed following the financial crisis. In light of the uncertain outlook, small business owners’ assessments of the risk of permanent closures remained elevated in most sectors, according to the Census Small Business Pulse Survey. In the CRE market, financing conditions remained ac- commodative, on net, over the intermeeting period. Agency commercial mortgage-backed security (CMBS) spreads remained narrow amid strong issuance in Octo- ber, while non-agency CMBS spreads ticked down. Triple-B-rated non-agency CMBS spreads came down substantially from their highs in the spring, although they remained elevated relative to pre-pandemic levels. Non-agency issuance picked up in October, nearing pre- pandemic levels. CRE bank loan growth in October and November remained weak, consistent with tightened bank lending standards. In the residential mortgage market, financing conditions remained highly accommodative for borrowers access- ing government-backed loans. Mortgage rates remained near historic lows, supporting robust loan originations. Credit continued to flow to higher-score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria while remaining tight for lower-score borrowers and for nonstandard mortgage products. The credit quality of mortgages was little changed, as the fraction of mortgages in forbear- ance held fairly steady, and the rate of transition into mortgage delinquency remained at pre-pandemic levels. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re- mained generally accommodative for borrowers with relatively strong credit. Credit card balances and average credit limits on existing accounts contracted, on net, for all types of borrowers. However, auto loan balances continued to increase for higher-quality borrowers, and loan rates remained well below pre-pandemic levels. Conditions in the asset-backed securities market re- mained stable over the intermeeting period. Staff Economic Outlook In the U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the December FOMC meeting, real GDP growth was revised up and the unemployment rate revised down for the fourth quarter relative to the November meeting forecast. These revisions reflected incoming data that were, on balance, better than expected, although the re- cent resurgence of the pandemic and increased social- distancing restrictions in many states and localities were expected to weigh on economic activity in the coming months. As a result, the staff expected that real GDP growth would temporarily weaken in the first quarter of 2021, and the slowing seen in some of the most recent Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ high-frequency indicators of spending and employment appeared consistent with that forecast. The inflation forecast for the rest of 2020 was revised down slightly in response to incoming data, and inflation was projected to finish the year at a relatively subdued level, reflecting substantial margins of labor- and product-market slack in the economy and the large declines in consumer en- ergy prices seen earlier in 2020. Primarily in response to the recent favorable news on the development of COVID-19 vaccines, the staff re- vised up its projection of real GDP growth for 2021 as a whole, as social-distancing measures were expected to ease more quickly than previously assumed. With mon- etary policy assumed to remain highly accommodative, the staff continued to project that real GDP growth over the medium term would be well above the rate of poten- tial output growth, leading to a considerable further de- cline in the unemployment rate. The resulting take-up of labor- and product-market slack was expected to lead to gradually increasing inflation, and, for some time in the years beyond 2023, inflation was projected to over- shoot 2 percent by a moderate amount, as monetary pol- icy remained accommodative. The staff observed that the uncertainty related to the fu- ture course of the pandemic, the measures to control it, and the associated economic effects remained elevated. In addition, the staff continued to judge the risks to the economic outlook as being tilted to the downside. The recent sharp resurgence in the pandemic suggested that the near-term risks had risen, while the recent favorable developments regarding vaccines pointed to some re- duction in the downside risks over the medium term. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2020 through 2023 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of ap- propriate monetary policy, including the path of the fed- eral funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, un- der appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Eco- nomic Projections (SEP) was released to the public fol- lowing the conclusion of the meeting. Participants noted that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Eco- nomic activity and employment had continued to re- cover but remained well below their levels at the begin- ning of the year. Weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices had been holding down consumer price infla- tion. Overall financial conditions remained accommo- dative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the eco- nomic outlook over the medium term. Participants observed that the economy continued to show resilience in the face of the pandemic, though it was still far from having attained conditions consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. They noted that the economic recovery thus far had been stronger than anticipated—suggesting greater momentum in eco- nomic activity than had been previously thought—but viewed the more recent indicators as signaling that the pace of recovery had slowed. With the pandemic wors- ening across the country, the expansion was expected to slow even further in coming months. Nevertheless, the positive vaccine news received over the intermeeting pe- riod was viewed as favorable for the medium-term eco- nomic outlook. Participants noted that household spending on goods, especially durables, had been strong. Participants com- mented that the rebound in consumer spending was due, in part, to fiscal programs such as federal stimulus pay- ments and expanded unemployment benefits. These measures had provided essential support to many house- holds. The support to incomes provided by fiscal pro- grams, combined with reduced spending by households on some services, had contributed to a historically large increase in aggregate household savings. Participants also observed that residential investment and home sales remained robust. Accommodative monetary policy was viewed as having provided support to interest rate sen- sitive expenditure categories, including residential in- vestment and consumer durables spending. Participants regarded the positive news on vaccine development as further strengthening the medium-term outlook for household spending. However, participants saw in- creased challenges for the economy in the coming months, as the ongoing surge of COVID-19 cases and the related mandatory and voluntary measures prompted greater social distancing and damped spending, espe- cially on services requiring in-person contact. Several Minutes of the Meeting of December 15–16, 2020Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ participants pointed out that readings on high-frequency economic indicators, such as individual mobility indexes and online restaurant reservation data, might already be registering the effects of the recent rise in virus cases. Various participants noted that low-income households were particularly hard hit by the effects of the resurgent virus, and that—with the looming expiration of the ex- panded unemployment benefits, eviction moratoria, and loan forbearance programs—their situations could dete- riorate significantly if additional relief and support did not materialize. With respect to the business sector, participants ob- served that business equipment investment had picked up further, with strong readings registered on new or- ders and shipments. A couple of participants remarked that the very low levels of inventories would likely be a factor supporting increases in production as demand continued to recover. Participants noted that the eco- nomic recovery had been uneven across firms and in- dustries. Though many business contacts, particularly those in the durable goods or housing sectors, reported progress in adapting to the pandemic and improved business practices, others—especially those closely linked to the leisure, travel, and hospitality industries— were still struggling, and their problems were intensify- ing because of the resurgence of the virus. Furthermore, while larger firms were generally seen as recovering rea- sonably well, conditions remained worrisome for small businesses. A number of participants noted that many small businesses were in especially vulnerable positions and that further fiscal policy support would help such businesses weather the ongoing surge in the pandemic, especially over the coming months. Looking further ahead, participants observed that continuing positive de- velopments on the vaccine front could further support business investment by helping reduce stresses in pandemic-sensitive industries and by boosting confi- dence. Participants remarked that labor market conditions gen- erally had continued to improve, but they were still a long way from those consistent with the Committee’s maximum employment goal. Although the pace of em- ployment gains had moderated in recent months, the overall recovery in employment thus far had been faster than anticipated, with a little more than half of the 22 million jobs lost over March and April having been regained. The unemployment rate had declined further, although several participants underlined the fact that the labor force participation rate remained below its pre- pandemic level—likely reflecting, in part, health con- cerns and additional childcare responsibilities associated with online schooling. Participants assessed that the on- going surge in COVID-19 infections would be particu- larly challenging for the labor market in coming months, but they indicated that they expected employment to continue to recover over the medium term. Participants stressed that the burdens of the economic downturn had fallen unequally on different groups; in particular, high rates of job losses had been especially prevalent among lower-wage workers and among African Americans and Hispanics. Some participants expressed the concern that the longer the pandemic continued, the more lasting damage to the labor market there could be. They noted that the number of unemployed workers who had been permanently laid off had increased notably in recent months and that those workers historically often re- quired a longer time to find a new job than those tem- porarily laid off. In light of these considerations, several participants assessed that improvements in the labor market were lagging that of economic activity, and they indicated that they had not revised their projections of labor market variables to the same extent as their revi- sion of the outlook for economic activity. In their comments about inflation, participants noted that increases in consumer prices had been soft of late, as prices of products in those categories most affected by social distancing—such as hotel accommodations and air travel—continued to be depressed and increases in rents remained low. These patterns were expected to continue in the near term as pandemic concerns intensi- fied over the winter. However, participants generally saw these downward pressures on inflation starting to abate next year, with widespread distribution of vaccines reducing social-distancing concerns and spurring eco- nomic activity. A couple of participants suggested that, as a result of ongoing technology-enabled disruption to business models and practices or lasting pandemic- induced restraint on firms’ pricing power, downward pressure on inflation could persist. Several participants noted a pickup in market-based measures of inflation compensation. Participants expected that, with contin- ued monetary policy support, inflation would rise over time. In their SEP submissions, seven participants— five more than in the September SEP—expected overall inflation to be above the Committee’s 2 percent longer- run objective in 2023. Participants noted that overall financial conditions were accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to house- holds and businesses. However, participants underlined important differences in credit availability across bor- rowers. Financing conditions eased further for large Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ corporations that were able to access capital markets, as equity prices rose and corporate credit spreads contin- ued to narrow, but smaller firms and some households reliant on bank lending continued to face tight lending standards. Participants noted that the financing condi- tions for small businesses were especially strained, with a few participants pointing out that a sizable fraction of small businesses had permanently closed or were in the process of transitioning to closure. A couple of partici- pants observed that aggregate banking data had not in- dicated a significant increase in loan delinquencies for C&I loans thus far, though this development could be partly due to the CARES Act provisions that provided relief to many troubled borrowers or to the fact that many small businesses had gone out of business without declaring bankruptcy or defaulting on loans. Some par- ticipants noted the important role played by the various section 13(3) facilities implemented in 2020 in serving as temporary backstops to key credit markets and in help- ing to restore and maintain the flow of credit to house- holds, businesses, and communities. These participants also mentioned the announcement that CARES Act funding to support new activity in many of these facili- ties would not be available after December 31, and a number noted that they saw downside risks associated with this development. Participants continued to see the uncertainty surround- ing the economic outlook as elevated, with the path of the economy highly dependent on the course of the vi- rus. The positive vaccine news was seen as reducing downside risks over the medium term, and a number of participants saw risks to economic activity as more bal- anced than earlier. Still, participants saw significant un- certainties regarding how quickly the deployment of vac- cines would proceed as well as how different members of the public would respond to the availability of vac- cines. Participants cited several downside risks that could threaten the economic recovery. These risks in- cluded the possibility of significant additional fiscal pol- icy support not materializing in a timely manner, the po- tential for further adverse pandemic developments— which could lead to more-stringent restrictions, more- severe business failures, and more permanent job losses—and the chance that trade negotiations between the United Kingdom and the European Union would not be concluded successfully before the December 31 deadline. As upside risks, participants mentioned the prospect that the release of pent-up demand, spurred by wider-scale vaccinations and easing of social distancing, could boost spending and bring individuals back to the labor force more quickly than currently expected as well as the possibility that fiscal policy developments could see measures that were larger than expected in amount or economic impact. Regarding inflation, participants generally viewed the risks as having become more bal- anced than they were earlier in the year, though most still viewed the risks as being weighted to the downside. As an upside risk to inflation, a few participants noted the potential for a stronger-than-expected recovery, coupled with the possible emergence of pandemic-related supply constraints, to boost inflation. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed the Federal Reserve’s commit- ment to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy during this challenging time, thereby promot- ing the Committee’s statutory goals of maximum em- ployment and price stability. Participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, em- ployment, and inflation in the near term. Participants noted that, with the pandemic worsening across the country, the expansion would likely slow in coming months. In contrast, for the medium term, participants commented that positive vaccine news had improved the economic outlook. That said, participants agreed that the path ahead remained highly uncertain and that the economy remained far from the Committee’s longer- run goals. In light of this assessment, all participants judged that maintaining an accommodative stance of monetary policy was essential to foster economic recov- ery and to achieve an average inflation rate of 2 percent over time. All participants supported enhancing the Committee’s guidance on asset purchases at this meeting and, in par- ticular, adopting qualitative, outcome-based guidance in- dicating that increases in asset holdings would continue, with purchases of Treasury securities of at least $80 bil- lion per month and of agency MBS of at least $40 billion per month, until substantial further progress has been made toward reaching the Committee’s maximum em- ployment and price stability goals. In their discussions of this change, participants noted that the new guidance regarding balance sheet policy brought the statement’s references to purchases into better alignment with the Committee’s outcome-based guidance on the federal funds rate, offered more clarity about the role played by the asset purchase program in providing accommoda- tion to meet the Committee’s economic goals, and un- derscored the responsiveness of balance sheet policy to unanticipated economic developments. A few partici- pants stressed that all of the Committee’s policy tools Minutes of the Meeting of December 15–16, 2020Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ were now well positioned to respond to the evolution of the economy. For example, if progress toward the Com- mittee’s goals proved slower than anticipated, the new guidance relayed the Committee’s intention to respond by increasing monetary policy accommodation through maintaining the current level of the target range of the federal funds rate for longer and raising the expected path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. A couple of participants remarked that, against this background, it was important to convey to the public that the federal funds rate remained the Committee’s primary policy tool. A number of participants discussed considerations re- lated to determining the eventual attainment of “sub- stantial further progress” toward reaching the Commit- tee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. Participants commented that this judgment would be broad, qualitative, and not based on specific numerical criteria or thresholds. Various participants noted the im- portance of the Committee clearly communicating its as- sessment of actual and expected progress toward its longer-run goals well in advance of the time when it could be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of purchases. Regarding the decisions on the pace and composition of the Committee’s asset purchases, all participants judged that it would be appropriate to continue those purchases at least at the current pace, and nearly all favored main- taining the current composition of purchases, although a couple of participants indicated that they were open to weighting purchases of Treasury securities toward longer maturities. Participants generally judged that the asset purchase program as structured was providing very significant policy accommodation. Some participants noted that the Committee could consider future adjust- ments to its asset purchases—such as increasing the pace of securities purchases or weighting purchases of Treas- ury securities toward those that had longer remaining maturities—if such adjustments were deemed appropri- ate to support the attainment of the Committee’s objec- tives. A few participants underlined the importance of continuing to evaluate the balance of costs and risks as- sociated with asset purchases against the benefits arising from purchases. Participants shared their views on the appropriate evo- lution of asset purchases once substantial further pro- gress had been made toward the Committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. A number of par- ticipants noted that, once such progress had been at- tained, a gradual tapering of purchases could begin and the process thereafter could generally follow a sequence similar to the one implemented during the large-scale purchase program in 2013 and 2014. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. They noted that economic activity and employment had con- tinued to recover but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year and that weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices had been holding down con- sumer price inflation. Overall financial conditions re- mained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this chal- lenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employ- ment and price stability goals. Members also stated that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus. In addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and was posing considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. All members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the Committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation running persistently below this longer- run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expecta- tions remain well anchored at 2 percent. Members ex- pected to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until those outcomes were achieved. All members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels con- sistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, members agreed that it would be appropri- ate for the Federal Reserve to continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency MBS by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress had been made toward the Committee’s maximum employment and price sta- bility goals. They judged that these asset purchases Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ would help foster smooth market functioning and ac- commodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Members also agreed that, in as- sessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective December 17, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. Increase the System Open Market Ac- count holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 billion per month. Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by additional amounts and commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. purchase agency • • Conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar funding markets. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per- counterparty limit can be temporarily in- creased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate set- tlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of a statement for release.6 The following statement was released at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. The COVID-19 pandemic is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Economic activity and employment have continued to re- cover but remain well below their levels at the beginning of the year. Weaker demand and ear- lier declines in oil prices have been holding down consumer price inflation. Overall finan- cial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the econ- omy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The path of the economy will depend signifi- cantly on the course of the virus. The ongoing public health crisis will continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running per- sistently below this longer-run goal, the Com- mittee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation 6 The statement approved at the meeting included a drafting error. By notation vote shortly after the meeting concluded, the Committee unanimously approved a corrected version of the statement for release at 2:00 p.m. Minutes of the Meeting of December 15–16, 2020Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Com- mittee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target labor market conditions have range until reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and in- flation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, the Federal Reserve will continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 bil- lion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the Committee’s maxi- mum employment and price stability goals. These asset purchases help foster smooth mar- ket functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. The Board of Governors also voted unan- imously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective De- cember 17, 2020. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 26– 27, 2021. The meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on De- cember 16, 2020. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on November 24, 2020, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on November 4–5, 2020. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 



Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee January 26–27, 2021 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconfer- ence on Tuesday, January 26, 2021, at 1:00 p.m. and con- tinued on Wednesday, January 27, 2021, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Mary C. Daly Charles L. Evans Randal K. Quarles Christopher J. Waller Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division James Bullard, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, of Board Members, Board of Governors Helen E. Mucciolo, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Brian M. Doyle, Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, Beverly Hirtle, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, and Chiara Scotti, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors John J. Stevens, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ellen E. Meade and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Steven A. Sharpe, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Marnie Gillis DeBoer and Min Wei, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Andrew Figura, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Eric C. Engstrom, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Jennifer Gallagher, Special Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie, Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mark A. Carlson, Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo, Olesya Grishchenko, Horacio Sapriza, and Fabian Winkler, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Pablo Cuba-Borda, Principal Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Andrew Paciorek, Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Lead Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Joseph W. Gruber, Daleep Singh, and Ellis W. Tallman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, New York, and Cleveland, respectively David Andolfatto, Spencer Krane, Keith Sill, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Chicago, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively Joe Peek, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston James Dolmas, Economic Policy Advisor and Senior Research Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 3 Committee organizational documents are available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_authoriza- tions.htm. Andrew Foerster, Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Annual Organizational Matters3 The agenda for this meeting reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate mem- bers of the Federal Open Market Committee for a term beginning January 26, 2021, were received and that these individuals executed their oaths of office. The elected members and alternate members were as fol- lows: John C. Williams, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with Helen E. Mucciolo, First Vice Presi- dent of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alter- nate Thomas I. Barkin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, with Eric Rosengren, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate Charles L. Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with Loretta J. Mester, President of the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate Raphael W. Bostic, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, with James Bullard, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate Mary C. Daly, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, with Esther L. George, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alternate By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Com- mittee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2022: Chair Vice Chair Secretary Deputy Secretary Assistant Secretary Jerome H. Powell John C. Williams James A. Clouse Matthew M. Luecke Michelle A. Smith Mark E. Van Der Weide General Counsel Michael Held Richard M. Ashton Trevor Reeve Stacey Tevlin Beth Anne Wilson Deputy General Counsel Assistant General Counsel Economist Economist Economist Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Shaghil Ahmed David Altig Kartik B. Athreya Brian M. Doyle Rochelle M. Edge Eric M. Engen Beverly Hirtle Sylvain Leduc Anna Paulson William Wascher Associate Economists By unanimous vote, the Committee selected the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account (SOMA). By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Lorie K. Logan and Patricia Zobel to serve at the pleasure of the Committee as manager and deputy manager of the SOMA, respectively, on the understanding that these se- lections were subject to being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Secretary’s note: The Federal Reserve Bank of New York subsequently sent advice that the manager and deputy manager selections indi- cated previously were satisfactory. By unanimous vote, the Committee voted to reaffirm without revision the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, the Authorization for Foreign Cur- rency Operations, and the Foreign Currency Directive, as shown below. The Guidelines for the Conduct of System Open Market Operations in Federal-Agency Is- sues remained suspended. AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS (As reaffirmed effective January 26, 2021) OPEN MARKET TRANSACTIONS 1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com- mittee”) authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee to execute open market trans- actions (the “Selected Bank”), to the extent necessary to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted by the Committee: A. To buy or sell in the open market securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to prin- cipal and interest by, the United States, and securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the United States, that are eligible for purchase or sale under Sec- tion 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (“Eligible Secu- rities”) for the System Open Market Account (“SOMA”): i. As an outright operation with securities dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained at the Selected Bank: on a same-day or deferred de- livery basis (including such transactions as are com- monly referred to as dollar rolls and coupon swaps) at market prices; or ii. As a temporary operation: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis, to purchase such Eligible Se- curities subject to an agreement to resell (“repo transactions”) or to sell such Eligible Securities sub- ject to an agreement to repurchase (“reverse repo transactions”) for a term of 65 business days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise authorized by the Committee, are determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual counterparties; B. To allow Eligible Securities in the SOMA to ma- ture without replacement; C. To exchange, at market prices, in connection with a Treasury auction, maturing Eligible Securities in the SOMA with the Treasury, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct obligations of the United States or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States; and D. To exchange, at market prices, maturing Eligible Securities in the SOMA with an agency of the United States, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct obligations of that agency or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by that agency. SECURITIES LENDING 2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, the Committee authorizes the Se- lected Bank to operate a program to lend Eligible Secu- rities held in the SOMA to dealers on an overnight basis (except that the Selected Bank may lend Eligible Securi- ties for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions). A. Such securities lending must be: i. At rates determined by competitive bidding; ii. At a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives of the program; _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 26–27, 2021Page 3 iii. Subject to reasonable limitations on the total amount of a specific issue of Eligible Securities that may be auctioned; and iv. Subject to reasonable limitations on the amount of Eligible Securities that each borrower may borrow. B. The Selected Bank may: i. Reject bids that, as determined in its sole dis- cretion, could facilitate a bidder’s ability to control a single issue; ii. Accept Treasury securities or cash as collateral for any loan of securities authorized in this para- graph 2; and iii. Accept agency securities as collateral only for a loan of agency securities authorized in this para- graph 2. OPERATIONAL READINESS TESTING 3. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to undertake transactions of the type described in para- graphs 1 and 2 from time to time for the purpose of test- ing operational readiness, subject to the following limi- tations: A. All transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 shall be conducted with prior notice to the Commit- tee; B. The aggregate par value of the transactions au- thorized in this paragraph 3 that are of the type de- scribed in paragraph 1.A.i, 1.B, 1.C and 1.D shall not exceed $5 billion per calendar year; and C. The outstanding amount of the transactions de- scribed in paragraphs 1.A.ii and 2 shall not exceed $5 billion at any given time. TRANSACTIONS WITH CUSTOMER ACCOUNTS In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 4. market operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments or other authorized services for foreign central bank and international accounts main- tained at a Federal Reserve Bank (the “Foreign Ac- counts”) and accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States pursuant to sec- tion 15 of the Federal Reserve Act (together with the Foreign Accounts, the “Customer Accounts”), the Com- mittee authorizes the following when undertaken on terms comparable to those available in the open market: A. The Selected Bank, for the SOMA, to: i. Undertake reverse repo transactions in Eligible Securities held in the SOMA with the Customer Ac- counts for a term of 65 business days or less; and ii. Undertake repo transactions in Eligible Securi- ties with Foreign Accounts; and B. Any Federal Reserve Bank that maintains Cus- tomer Accounts, for any such Customer Account, when appropriate and subject to all other necessary authorization and approvals, to: i. Undertake repo transactions in Eligible Securi- ties with dealers with a corresponding reverse repo transaction in such Eligible Securities with the Cus- tomer Accounts; and ii. Undertake intra-day repo transactions in Eligi- ble Securities with Foreign Accounts. Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts un- der the provisions of this paragraph 4 may provide for a service fee when appropriate. Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts are also subject to the authori- zation or approval of other entities, including the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and, when involving accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States, the United States Department of the Treasury. ADDITIONAL MATTERS 5. The Committee authorizes the Chair of the Com- mittee, in fostering the Committee’s objectives during any period between meetings of the Committee, to in- struct the Selected Bank to act on behalf of the Commit- tee to: A. Adjust somewhat in exceptional circumstances the stance of monetary policy and to take actions that may result in material changes in the composition and size of the assets in the SOMA; or B. Undertake transactions with respect to Eligible Securities in order to appropriately address temporary disruptions of an operational or highly unusual nature in U.S. dollar funding markets. Any such adjustment described in subparagraph A of this paragraph 5 shall be made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and decision about the stance of policy at its most recent meeting and the Committee’s long-run objectives to foster maximum employment and price stability, and shall be based on economic, financial, Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ and monetary developments since the most recent meet- ing of the Committee. The Chair, whenever feasible, will consult with the Committee before making any instruc- tion under this paragraph 5. In consultation, as appropriate, with foreign C. monetary authorities, foreign central banks, and inter- national monetary institutions. D. At prevailing market rates. AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS (As reaffirmed effective January 26, 2021) IN GENERAL 1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com- mittee”) authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to execute open market transactions for the System Open Market Ac- count as provided in this Authorization, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee: A. To purchase and sell foreign currencies (also known as cable transfers) at home and abroad in the open market, including with the United States Treas- ury, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with other entities in the open market. This authorization to purchase and sell foreign currencies encompasses purchases and sales through standalone spot or forward transactions and through foreign exchange swap transactions. For purposes of this Authorization, foreign exchange swap transactions are: swap transactions with the United States Treasury (also known as warehousing transactions), swap transactions with other central banks under reciprocal currency arrangements, swap transactions with other central banks under standing dollar liquidity and foreign currency liquidity swap ar- rangements, and swap transactions with other entities in the open market. B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding for- ward contracts to receive or to deliver, foreign curren- cies. 2. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall, unless otherwise authorized by the Committee, be conducted: In a manner consistent with the obligations re- A. garding exchange arrangements under Article IV of the Articles of Agreement of the International Mone- tary Fund (IMF).1 B. tation, as appropriate, with the United States Treasury. In close and continuous cooperation and consul- STANDALONE SPOT AND FORWARD TRANS- ACTIONS 3. For any operation that involves standalone spot or forward transactions in foreign currencies: A. Approval of such operation is required as fol- lows: i. The Committee must direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and for- ward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Authorization, exceeding $5 billion since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the Committee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”) must direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the opera- tion if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the Committee is not feasible in the time avail- able. ii. The Committee authorizes the Subcommittee to direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Au- thorization, totaling $5 billion or less since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the Commit- tee. B. Such an operation also shall be: i. Generally directed at countering disorderly market conditions; or ii. Undertaken to adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for currencies; or iii. Conducted for such other purposes as may be determined by the Committee. C. For purposes of this Authorization, the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregard- ing signs) of the dollar values of individual foreign cur- rencies purchased and sold, valued at the time of the transaction. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 26–27, 2021Page 5 WAREHOUSING 4. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank, with the prior approval of the Subcommittee and at the re- quest of the United States Treasury, to conduct swap transactions with the United States Exchange Stabiliza- tion Fund established by section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934 under agreements in which the Selected Bank purchases foreign currencies from the Exchange Stabilization Fund and the Exchange Stabilization Fund repurchases the foreign currencies from the Selected Bank at a later date (such purchases and sales also known as warehousing). RECIPROCAL CURRENCY ARRANGEMENTS, AND STANDING DOLLAR AND FOREIGN CUR- RENCY LIQUIDITY SWAPS 5. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements established under the North American Framework Agreement, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements as provided in this Authorization and to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee. A. For reciprocal currency arrangements all draw- ings must be approved in advance by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee be- lieves that consultation with the Committee is not fea- sible in the time available). B. For standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements all drawings must be approved in ad- vance by the Chair. The Chair may approve a schedule of potential drawings, and may delegate to the man- ager, System Open Market Account, the authority to approve individual drawings that occur according to the schedule approved by the Chair. C. For standing foreign currency liquidity swap ar- rangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the Committee is not feasible in the time available). D. Operations involving standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements and standing for- eign currency liquidity swap arrangements shall gener- ally be directed at countering strains in financial mar- kets in the United States or abroad, or reducing the risk that they could emerge, so as to mitigate their ef- fects on economic and financial conditions in the United States. E. For reciprocal currency arrangements, standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements: i. All arrangements are subject to annual review and approval by the Committee; ii. the Committee; and iii. Any changes in the terms of existing arrange- ments must be approved in advance by the Chair. The Chair shall keep the Committee informed of any changes in terms, and the terms shall be con- sistent with principles discussed with and guidance provided by the Committee. Any new arrangements must be approved by OTHER OPERATIONS IN FOREIGN CURREN- CIES 6. Any other operations in foreign currencies for which governance is not otherwise specified in this Au- thorization (such as foreign exchange swap transactions with private-sector counterparties) must be authorized and directed in advance by the Committee. FOREIGN CURRENCY HOLDINGS 7. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to hold foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac- count in accounts maintained at foreign central banks, the Bank for International Settlements, and such other foreign institutions as approved by the Board of Gover- nors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee. A. The Selected Bank shall manage all holdings of foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac- count: i. Primarily, to ensure sufficient liquidity to ena- ble the Selected Bank to conduct foreign currency operations as directed by the Committee; ii. safety; iii. Subject to paragraphs 7.A.i and 7.A.ii, to pro- vide the highest rate of return possible in each cur- rency; and iv. To achieve such other objectives as may be au- thorized by the Committee. Secondarily, to maintain a high degree of Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ B. The Selected Bank may manage such foreign cur- rency holdings by: i. Purchasing and selling obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, a foreign government or agency thereof (“Permitted Foreign Securities”) through outright purchases and sales; ii. Purchasing Permitted Foreign Securities under agreements for repurchase of such Permitted For- eign Securities and selling such securities under agreements for the resale of such securities; and iii. Managing balances in various time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions approved by the Board of Governors under Regulation N. C. The Subcommittee, in consultation with the Committee, may provide additional instructions to the Selected Bank regarding holdings of foreign curren- cies. ADDITIONAL MATTERS 8. The Committee authorizes the Chair: A. With the prior approval of the Committee, to en- ter into any needed agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the United States Treasury about the division of responsibility for foreign currency opera- tions between the System and the United States Treas- ury; B. To advise the Secretary of the United States Treasury concerning System foreign currency opera- tions, and to consult with the Secretary on policy mat- ters relating to foreign currency operations; C. To designate Federal Reserve System persons au- thorized to communicate with the United States Treasury concerning System Open Market Account foreign currency operations; and D. From time to time, to transmit appropriate re- ports and information to the National Advisory Coun- cil on International Monetary and Financial Policies. 9. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to undertake transactions of the type described in this Au- thorization, and foreign exchange and investment transactions that it may be otherwise authorized to undertake, from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness. The aggregate amount of such transactions shall not exceed $2.5 billion per calendar year. These transactions shall be conducted with prior notice to the Committee. 10. All Federal Reserve banks shall participate in the foreign currency operations for System Open Market Account in accordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Governors’ Statement of Procedure with Re- spect to Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944. 11. Any authority of the Subcommittee pursuant to this Authorization may be exercised by the Chair if the Chair believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available. The Chair shall promptly report to the Subcommittee any action ap- proved by the Chair pursuant to this paragraph. 12. The Committee authorizes the Chair, in excep- tional circumstances where it would not be feasible to convene the Committee, to foster the Committee’s ob- jectives by instructing the Selected Bank to engage in foreign currency operations not otherwise authorized pursuant to this Authorization. Any such action shall be made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and decisions regarding foreign currency operations. The Chair, whenever feasible, will consult with the Commit- tee before making any instruction under this paragraph. __________________________ 1 In general, as specified in Article IV, each member of the IMF undertakes to collaborate with the IMF and other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates. These obligations include seeking to direct the member’s economic and financial policies toward the objective of fostering orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability. These obligations also include avoiding manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in such a way that would impede effective balance of payments adjustment or to give an unfair competitive advantage over other members. FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE (As reaffirmed effective January 26, 2021) 1. The Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to ex- ecute open market transactions, for the System Open Market Account, in accordance with the provisions of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations (the “Authorization”) and subject to the limits in this Di- rective. 2. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to exe- cute warehousing transactions, if so requested by the United States Treasury and if approved by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”), subject to the limitation that the outstanding balance of United States dollars provided to the United States Treasury as _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 26–27, 2021Page 7 a result of these transactions not at any time exceed $5 billion. 3. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to main- tain, for the System Open Market Account: A. Reciprocal currency arrangements with the fol- lowing foreign central banks: Foreign central bank Maximum amount (millions of dollars or equivalent) 2,000 3,000 Bank of Canada Bank of Mexico Standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements with B. the following foreign central banks: Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank C. Temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements with the following foreign central banks: Reserve Bank of Australia National Bank of Denmark Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bank of Norway Bank of Sweden Central Bank of Brazil Bank of Mexico Bank of Korea Monetary Authority of Singapore D. Standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrange- ments with the following foreign central banks: Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank 4. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to hold and to invest foreign currencies in the portfolio in ac- cordance with the provisions of paragraph 7 of the Au- thorization. 5. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to report to the Committee, at each regular meeting of the Com- mittee, on transactions undertaken pursuant to para- graphs 1 and 6 of the Authorization. The Selected Bank is also directed to provide quarterly reports to the Com- mittee regarding the management of the foreign cur- rency holdings pursuant to paragraph 7 of the Authori- zation. 6. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to con- duct testing of transactions for the purpose of opera- tional readiness in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9 of the Authorization. By unanimous vote, the Committee reaffirmed its Pro- gram for Security of FOMC Information with minor technical changes. In the Committee’s annual reconsideration of the State- ment on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strat- egy, all participants supported the statement as written, and the Committee voted unanimously to reaffirm without revision. STATEMENT ON LONGER-RUN GOALS AND MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY (As reaffirmed effective January 26, 2021) The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, sta- ble prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy deci- sions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncer- tainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and finan- cial disturbances. Monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to these dis- turbances. The Committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee judges that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. Therefore, the federal funds rate is likely to be con- strained by its effective lower bound more frequently Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ than in the past. Owing in part to the proximity of in- terest rates to the effective lower bound, the Committee judges that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. The Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor mar- ket. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to spec- ify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, rec- ognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily de- termined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expendi- tures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee judges that longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and mod- erate long-term interest rates and enhance the Commit- tee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently be- low 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. Monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks over time to mit- igate shortfalls of employment from the Committee’s as- sessment of its maximum level and deviations of infla- tion from its longer-run goal. Moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability de- pends on a stable financial system. Therefore, the Com- mittee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the bal- ance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. However, under circum- stances in which the Committee judges that the objec- tives are not complementary, it takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employ- ment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organi- zational meeting each January, and to undertake roughly every 5 years a thorough public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments. The evolving outlooks for the path of the virus and for fiscal policy were the main driv- ers of financial markets over the intermeeting period. Progress on vaccinations had been slower than expected, and the near-term trajectory of the pandemic worsened, weighing on economic activity. However, even with the appearance of new strains of the virus, market confi- dence in the ultimate efficacy of the vaccination efforts seemed to remain high. The emergence of a narrow Democratic majority in the Senate bolstered investor ex- pectations for additional fiscal stimulus, prompting up- ward revisions to forecasts for economic growth this year. In the Open Market Desk Survey of Primary Deal- ers, the median 2021 gross domestic product (GDP) growth forecast rose about 1 percentage point. Against this backdrop, longer-term Treasury yields rose notably over the period. Longer-dated real yields were lifted by expectations for improved growth and in- creased Treasury issuance, but remained deeply negative. Measures of inflation compensation increased over the period, with the five-year, five-year-forward measure ris- ing to a level of around 2 percent. Overall financial con- ditions eased further, on net, as the recent rally in risk assets continued. Gains in U.S. equities again centered on cyclical sectors and smaller-capitalization firms most sensitive to growth. Credit spreads narrowed further, especially for riskier borrowers. Expectations for the path of the target federal funds rate over the next several years, as implied by interest rate futures and by the Desk Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants, were relatively little changed from December. The stability in near-term pol- icy rate expectations amid an improving growth outlook appeared consistent with the Committee’s new frame- work and forward interest rate guidance. Although the median Desk survey respondent continued to expect _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 26–27, 2021Page 9 12-month personal consumption expenditure (PCE) in- flation of 2.3 percent when the FOMC first lifts the tar- get range, the median expectation for the unemployment rate prevailing at that time was modestly lower than in December. The Desk survey results indicated that a ma- jority of market participants anticipated that the pace of net asset purchases would remain stable for the remain- der of the year and slow around the first quarter of 2022. The manager next discussed conditions in funding mar- kets. Over the year-end, overnight secured and unse- cured rates were little changed at rates just below the in- terest on excess reserves (IOER) rate even as financial firms managed their balance sheets for the reporting date. Going forward, reserves were projected to rise rap- idly through the summer, reflecting ongoing Federal Re- serve asset purchases as well as expected declines in bal- ances held in the Treasury General Account. Market pricing suggested that the effective federal funds rate was expected to decline modestly through the second quarter. Even if more notable downward pressure on money market rates emerged, the manager anticipated that the Federal Reserve’s tools, including the IOER rate and overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility, would continue to provide effective control over the federal funds rate and other overnight money market rates. Finally, the manager discussed Desk operations. A range of indicators suggested that both fixed-income and funding markets continued to function smoothly over the period. The manager noted that, in the coming pe- riod, the Desk anticipated implementing two adjust- ments to continue to normalize operations. First, given the sustained stability in term repurchase markets, the Desk proposed discontinuing the weekly one-month term repurchase operations, beginning in mid-February. In addition, the Desk planned to reduce the frequency of agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) operations in light of the sustained improve- ment in market conditions for these securities. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. No intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the System’s account during the intermeeting period. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activ- ity in the United States and abroad. The information available at the time of the January 26–27 meeting sug- gested that U.S. real GDP had continued to advance in the fourth quarter of 2020, albeit at a pace that was mark- edly slower than the rapid rate seen in the third quarter, while the level of real GDP had not yet returned to the level seen before the onset of the pandemic. Labor mar- ket conditions deteriorated, on balance, in December, and employment continued to be well below its level at the start of 2020. Consumer price inflation through No- vember—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the PCE price index—remained considerably lower than the rates seen in early 2020. Total nonfarm payroll employment fell in December, with especially sharp declines in the leisure and hospital- ity sector. As of December, payroll employment had re- traced a little more than half of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. The unemployment rate held steady at 6.7 percent in December. The unemployment rate for African Americans declined and the Hispanic unemployment rate rose; both rates remained well above the national average. However, the Asian unemploy- ment rate moved below the national average in Decem- ber. Both the labor force participation rate and employ- ment-to-population ratio were unchanged in December. Initial claims for unemployment insurance in mid-Janu- ary were higher than their early December level. Weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by Fed- eral Reserve Board staff using data provided by the pay- roll processor ADP indicated that the four-week average change in private employment in mid-January was slightly lower than it had been in early December; how- ever, the most recent week-to-week changes in this measure of payrolls had been highly volatile. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 5.1 per- cent over the 12 months ending in December, a gain that was noticeably higher than the measure’s year-earlier 12-month change. The 12-month change in average hourly earnings continued to be dominated by changes in the composition of the workforce, with the concen- tration of job losses among lower-wage workers over the pandemic period resulting in outsized increases in this measure of earnings that were not indicative of tight la- bor market conditions. By contrast, a staff measure of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the ADP data—a measure likely to have been less af- fected by changes in workforce composition—was 3½ percent in December and remained well below its pre-pandemic pace. Total PCE price inflation was 1.1 percent over the 12 months ending in November and continued to be held down by relatively weak aggregate demand and the declines in consumer energy prices seen over the first Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ part of 2020. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in November, while the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE inflation constructed by the Federal Re- serve Bank of Dallas was 1.7 percent in November. In December, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 1.4 percent, while core CPI inflation was 1.6 percent over the same period. The latest read- ings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations ticked higher. In the first part of January, the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers meas- ure for the next 5 to 10 years moved back up to its late-summer level, while in December, the 3-year-ahead measure of inflation expectations produced by the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of New York moved back up to its August level. Real PCE fell in November, and available indicators— including the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate PCE—pointed to a further decline in December. Housing starts and construction permits moved up in November and December and finished the year well above their pre-pandemic levels. Although home sales turned down in November, the decline ap- peared to reflect limited availability of homes for sale ra- ther than weakening demand. Available indicators pointed to a strong increase in in- vestment in equipment and intangibles in the fourth quarter of 2020, as this component of capital spending recovered from its sharp decline over the first half of the year. Likewise, drilling investment appeared to have turned up sharply, albeit from a low level, as oil prices moved higher. By contrast, investment in nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector ap- peared to have declined further in the fourth quarter and had likely been restrained by firms’ continued hesitation to commit to projects with lengthy times to completion and uncertain future returns. Industrial production advanced further in the fourth quarter, led by a solid gain in manufacturing output, but had not yet overtaken its pre-pandemic level. The low level of export demand since the onset of the pandemic had likely continued to restrain the recovery in the man- ufacturing sector; in addition, production of motor ve- hicles and parts was a small drag on manufacturing out- put in the fourth quarter as automotive producers ap- peared to have had difficulty getting assemblies fully un- der way for the new model year. Total real government purchases appeared to have fallen further in the fourth quarter, though at a slower pace than in the third quarter. Available data suggested that real federal purchases had posted a modest gain, as an increase in defense purchases offset a reduction in non- defense purchases; however, indicators of real state and local purchases, including state and local government employment, pointed to a fourth-quarter decline similar in size to what had been seen in the third quarter. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened fur- ther in November. Both imports and exports continued to rebound from their collapse in the first half of the year. Goods imports rose in November to a level well above that of the previous January, with gains in most major categories. Although exports also grew in No- vember, they had not yet recovered to their January 2020 level. Services trade continued a gradual rise but re- mained depressed, driven by the continued suspension of most international travel. Taken together, these data suggested that net exports made a significant negative contribution to real GDP growth in the fourth quarter. Recent data pointed to a sharp slowing in foreign eco- nomic growth in the fourth quarter, after a strong re- bound in the third quarter. Amid a further intensifica- tion of the pandemic, many foreign governments tight- ened social-distancing restrictions. In a few countries, the emergence of new and more contagious virus strains was accompanied by a surge in COVID-19 cases and deaths. The increased virus spread and restrictions ap- peared to take a toll on foreign economic activity, par- ticularly in Europe. The global slowdown was most no- table for services, with further declines in purchasing managers indexes for this sector through January in many advanced foreign economies. By contrast, manu- facturing output in both advanced and emerging foreign economies continued to expand at a solid pace, sup- ported by resilient demand for durable goods, high-tech goods, and medical supplies. Amid the generally weak economic situation, inflationary pressures remained sub- dued in most foreign economies. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investor sentiment improved and risk asset prices moved higher over the intermeeting period on greater prospects for additional fiscal stimulus. Domestic and foreign equity prices increased notably, and spreads on corporate and municipal bonds narrowed. The nominal Treasury yield curve steepened, partly reflecting an in- crease in inflation compensation. Market-based financ- ing conditions remained accommodative, while bank lending conditions continued to be tight. However, a smaller net share of banks tightened lending standards than in previous quarters. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 26–27, 2021Page 11 A straight read of overnight index swap (OIS) quotes suggested that the expected path of the federal funds rate beyond mid-2023 rose moderately over the inter- meeting period, with the increases reportedly associated largely with greater investor optimism regarding the ex- pected speed of the economic recovery. OIS quotes suggested that the expected policy rate would remain be- low 25 basis points until the third quarter of 2023, little changed from the time of the December meeting. The yield on 2-year nominal Treasury securities was little changed over the intermeeting period, while the 10-year yield rose notably. Most of the steepening of the Treas- ury yield curve occurred following the outcome of the Georgia runoff elections, which reportedly bolstered market participants’ expectations for additional fiscal stimulus. The FOMC’s updated guidance around asset purchases was seen as broadly in line with expectations and did not elicit noticeable financial market reaction. Measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities increased moderately, on net, continuing the upward trend observed over recent months, with the increase over the intermeeting period reportedly reflecting greater prospects for additional fis- cal stimulus and an associated improvement in the longer-run economic outlook. Broad stock price indexes increased, on net, over the in- termeeting period, boosted by gains in the share prices of banks and companies in more cyclically sensitive sec- tors, reportedly reflecting, in part, increased expectations of fiscal stimulus. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—was little changed, on net, remaining modestly elevated relative to its range over the past several years. Consistent with the optimism driving stock prices, spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity Treasury yields narrowed some- what. Spreads on municipal bond yields narrowed nota- bly in January, reportedly reflecting increased expecta- tions of additional fiscal stimulus and aid to state and local governments. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period, including over the year- end. Spreads for commercial paper and negotiable cer- tificates of deposit across tenors were largely unchanged at historically low levels. Commercial paper outstanding declined somewhat in late December but quickly re- bounded in early January to the levels observed before year-end. Amid stable market conditions, there was no take-up at the Commercial Paper Funding Facility or the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility over the intermeeting period. Assets under management (AUM) of government money market funds (MMFs) remained stable over the intermeeting period. AUM of prime MMFs continued to decline, reaching the lowest level since late 2018, likely reflecting the compressed net yield advantage for prime funds relative to yields for govern- ment funds. The net yields of both prime and govern- ment MMFs remained near historically low levels. The effective federal funds rate and the Secured Over- night Financing Rate were little changed, averaging 9 ba- sis points and 8 basis points, respectively, over the inter- meeting period. There continued to be no participation in the Fed’s repurchase agreement (repo) operations, and participation in the Fed’s reverse repo facility was minimal. In foreign financial markets, the prospect of additional U.S. fiscal stimulus and the passage of key risk events such as the Brexit trade agreement largely outweighed investor concerns around new virus strains and the slug- gish global vaccine rollout. On balance, foreign equity prices increased moderately, with notable outperfor- mance in some Asian indexes, and capital inflows into mutual funds dedicated to emerging markets continued at a robust pace. Longer-term sovereign yields in most advanced foreign economies rose slightly on improved investor sentiment even while several major central banks reaffirmed their commitment to continue or pos- sibly expand accommodative policies. The broad dollar index was little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period, while the Chinese renminbi appreciated notably against the dollar as data showed a robust economic re- covery in China. Dollar funding conditions were gener- ally stable around year-end. Financing conditions in capital markets remained broadly accommodative, supported by low interest rates and high equity valuations. Gross corporate bond issu- ance was fairly strong in November and December, and seasoned and initial public offerings in the equity mar- kets were robust. Gross institutional leveraged loan is- suance was also strong in December, as issuance vol- umes excluding refinancing topped their averages for previous months of 2020 and were above those ob- served during the same period of 2019. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loan balances at banks continued to decline in December, albeit at a slower pace than in the fall. C&I loans declined in the fourth quarter because of weak origination activity, loan forgiveness at the Paycheck Protection Program, and continued repay- ments of bank debt. In the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks, on net, reported weaker demand and tightened Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ lending standards for C&I loans, with notable differ- ences in reported changes across bank sizes. Large banks reported having eased standards to large and mid- dle-market firms, while, on net, banks of all sizes re- ported having tightened standards to small firms. How- ever, a smaller net percentage of banks tightened lending standards to firms of all sizes than in previous quarters. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained stable in recent months after deteriorating substantially for several months following the onset of the pandemic. The volume of nonfinancial corporate bond downgrades continued to slightly outpace upgrades in November and December, and the monthly volume of nonfinancial cor- porate bond defaults remained relatively low. Market in- dicators of future default expectations moved slightly lower, essentially returning to their pre-pandemic levels. Financing conditions for small businesses remained tight, but small business loan originations in November, the most recent month for which data were available, were at roughly the level seen a year earlier, likely sup- ported by the refinancing of existing loans. Meanwhile, liquidity needs of small businesses remained high as businesses continued to operate at reduced capacity. Small business delinquency and default rates were little changed but remained elevated relative to the levels of recent years. Financing conditions in the municipal bond market remained generally accommodative over the intermeeting period, and the credit quality of munic- ipal debt remained roughly stable. For commercial real estate (CRE) financed through cap- ital markets, financing conditions remained generally ac- commodative, easing further over the intermeeting pe- riod. Spreads on agency CMBS ticked down, on net, and issuance remained elevated through December, al- though below its recent historical high in October. Risk spreads on triple-B non-agency CMBS declined, and spreads on triple-A non-agency CMBS stayed close to their historical lows. Issuance of non-agency CMBS re- mained somewhat below its pre-pandemic level. CRE bank loan growth remained weak in the fourth quarter amid depressed property transaction volumes. On net, in the January SLOOS, banks reported a further tighten- ing of lending standards and further weakening in de- mand for CRE loans. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were little changed over the intermeeting period. Mort- gage rates ticked up slightly but stayed near historically low levels, supporting strong loan origination activity. Credit remained broadly available to higher-score bor- rowers seeking conforming mortgages but tightened fur- ther, from already tight levels, for borrowers with lower credit scores and those seeking nonconforming mort- gages. The January SLOOS suggested that for most types of residential mortgages, banks’ lending standards remained unchanged, while loan demand was either little changed or somewhat stronger. Mortgage forbearance rates plateaued in December and early January after hav- ing gradually declined over the previous six months, and the rate of new delinquencies stayed at low, pre-pan- demic levels. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets gener- ally remained accommodative for borrowers with strong credit scores but tight for those with subprime scores. Banks in the January SLOOS reported easing standards for all consumer loan types and experiencing weaker de- mand for auto loans and little-changed demand for other consumer loans. Conditions in the asset-backed securi- ties market appeared supportive of lending. Credit card balances edged down further for both prime and nonprime borrowers, likely reflecting weak consumer spending. However, the volume of new cards and avail- able credit continued to rise for both prime and nonprime borrowers. Interest rates on new credit card offers for nonprime borrowers stayed elevated, and fi- nancing conditions remained tight for those borrowers. Auto loan balances continued to increase solidly for prime and near-prime borrowers but declined further for subprime borrowers. Auto loan interest rates were about flat over the past few months and remained sig- nificantly below their pre-pandemic levels. Delinquency rates for nonprime auto and credit card borrowers ticked up, albeit from very low levels. The staff provided an update on its assessments of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, charac- terized the financial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as notable. The staff assessed asset valuation pressures as elevated. In particular, corporate bond spreads had declined to pre-pandemic levels, which were at the lower ends of their historical distributions. In ad- dition, measures of the equity risk premium declined fur- ther, returning to pre-pandemic levels. Prices for indus- trial and multifamily properties continued to grow through 2020 at about the same pace as in the past sev- eral years, while prices of office buildings and retail es- tablishments started to fall. The staff assessed vulnera- bilities associated with household and business borrow- ing as notable, reflecting increased leverage and de- creased incomes and revenues in 2020. Small businesses were hit particularly hard. The staff judged that vulner- _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 26–27, 2021Page 13 abilities stemming from financial leverage were moder- ate, noting that capital ratios at the largest bank holding companies rose over the course of last year; leverage among hedge funds was elevated but it did decline last spring for the most highly leveraged funds. The staff characterized vulnerabilities stemming from funding risks as moderate. Banks continued to maintain signifi- cant levels of high-quality liquid assets and stable sources of funding. In contrast, money market funds and open- ended mutual funds were characterized by significant vulnerabilities associated with liquidity transformation. Staff Economic Outlook The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the January FOMC meeting implied a considerably stronger outlook for activity in 2021 relative to the De- cember forecast. Although incoming data had been weaker than expected, the staff’s January projection in- corporated the effects of the stimulus in the recently en- acted Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (CAA), to- gether with an assumption that an additional sizable tranche of fiscal support would be put into place in com- ing months. Taken together, these stimulus measures were expected to partly offset the substantial drag on ag- gregate demand that would result from the unwinding of the fiscal stimulus enacted in the spring of 2020. The staff’s projection continued to anticipate that widespread vaccination would allow for an easing in social distanc- ing in 2021. With the boost to growth from the reduc- tion in social distancing assumed to be largely completed by the end of 2021, GDP growth was expected to step down over the remainder of the medium term. Even so, the staff continued to project that real GDP growth would outpace that of potential over this period, leading to a considerable further decline in the unemployment rate. The 12-month changes in total and core PCE prices in coming months were projected to briefly move above 2 percent in the second quarter of 2021 as the unusually low observations from the spring of 2020 drop out of the 12-month calculation. Following these swings, infla- tion was expected to finish the year at just below 2 per- cent. Thereafter, inflation was projected to gradually edge up to 2 percent by the end of the medium term as labor and product markets tightened. With monetary policy assumed to remain accommodative, inflation was projected to moderately overshoot 2 percent for some time in the years beyond 2023. The staff viewed the possibility that a larger-than-antici- pated fiscal package would be enacted in coming months as a modest upside risk to the baseline economic out- look. However, the further rise in COVID-19 cases in the United States, coupled with developments such as the emergence of more-contagious strains of the virus in the United States and elsewhere, led the staff to continue to judge that the risks to the baseline projection were skewed to the downside and that the uncertainty around the forecast was elevated. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook Participants noted that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. The pace of the recovery in economic activity and employment had moderated in recent months, with weakness concen- trated in the sectors of the economy most adversely af- fected by the resurgence of the virus and by greater so- cial distancing. Weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. Overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting the Federal Reserve’s actions to sup- port the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. house- holds and businesses. Participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations, and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and infla- tion and posed considerable risks to the economic out- look. Participants observed that the resurgence in COVID-19 infections and associated social-distancing measures were restraining activity in some sectors, particularly in industries such as travel and leisure and hospitality. Most participants expected that the stimulus provided by the passage of the CAA in December, the likelihood of additional fiscal support, and anticipated continued pro- gress in vaccinations would lead to a sizable boost in economic activity. Even so, participants noted that eco- nomic activity and employment were currently well be- low levels consistent with achieving maximum employ- ment. Participants commented on improved prospects for household spending over the course of the year, in part reflecting fiscal support. They saw progress on vaccina- tions as essential for supporting further gains in aggre- gate consumer spending and for the economic recovery more generally. In commenting on recent data for household spending, most participants discussed the composition of expenditures, with strong spending on Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ many goods, especially durables, and weakness in spend- ing on some services, especially in travel and in leisure and hospitality. The relative strength in consumer spending on goods was supported by fiscal programs such as federal stimulus payments and expanded unem- ployment benefits as well as by accommodative mone- tary policy. The weakness in services spending was largely attributed to the pandemic and associated social- distancing measures, which limited spending on services that depend heavily on in-person contact. Increased government transfers to households, combined with re- duced outlays on some services, had contributed to a his- torically large increase in aggregate household savings last year. Participants also observed that residential in- vestment and home sales remained robust; low interest rates were viewed as an important factor supporting the strength in housing activity. Most participants noted that the economic downturn had not fallen equally on all Americans and that those least able to shoulder the burden—in particular, lower- income and Black and Hispanic households—had been the hardest hit by the pandemic. Many participants stressed that sustained support from fiscal policy would help address the hardships faced by these groups and that monetary policy could also help by promoting the economy’s return to maximum employment and price stability. In their remarks on the business sector, participants commented that business equipment investment had continued to show strength while nonresidential con- struction remained weak. Participants also discussed the recent strong performance of the manufacturing sector. Many discussed supply chain issues in manufacturing, in- cluding those associated with acquiring material inputs and pandemic-related worker shortages and absentee- ism. Business contacts reported that firms in goods-pro- ducing industries, particularly larger firms and those in the durable goods or housing sectors, were adapting to the pandemic; in contrast, smaller firms and those in in- dustries most adversely affected by the pandemic were finding it more difficult to adapt. Many participants stated that their business contacts were optimistic that continued progress on vaccinations, together with fur- ther fiscal support, would result in more improvement in overall business conditions. Several participants noted the increase in agricultural crop prices over 2020 and the associated improvement in farm revenues. As with overall economic activity, the pace of improve- ment in the labor market had slowed in recent months. Payroll employment fell in December, as continued job gains in many industries were outweighed by significant layoffs in industries where the resurgence of the virus had weighed heavily on activity. While labor market conditions had improved significantly, on balance, since the spring, some participants noted that if the sizable number of workers who reported having left the labor force since the beginning of the pandemic were to be counted as unemployed, the unemployment rate would be substantially higher. Participants judged that the cur- rent low level of labor force participation likely reflected a number of factors, including health concerns and ad- ditional childcare responsibilities. Over the medium term, participants expected strong growth in employ- ment, driven by continued progress on vaccinations and an associated rebound of economic activity and of con- sumer and business confidence, as well as accommoda- tive fiscal and monetary policy. However, participants observed that the economy was far from achieving the Committee’s broad-based and inclusive goal of maxi- mum employment and that even with a brisk pace of im- provement in the labor market, achieving this goal would take some time. In their comments about inflation, participants noted that headline PCE price inflation in December, meas- ured on a 12-month basis, was poised to come in well below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-term objective. In the relatively near term, a number of participants sug- gested that there could be increases in the prices of some goods whose production has been subject to supply chain constraints, or soon could be; others anticipated that a possibly abrupt return to normal levels of activity could result in one-time increases in certain prices. Many participants stressed the importance of distin- guishing between such one-time changes in relative prices and changes in the underlying trend for inflation, noting that changes in relative prices could temporarily raise measured inflation but would be unlikely to have a lasting effect. Some participants further observed that 12-month PCE inflation was likely to move somewhat above 2 percent for a brief period in the spring as the unusually low monthly observations from last spring roll out of the 12-month calculation. Outside of such near- term fluctuations, participants generally anticipated that inflation would move up along a trajectory consistent with achieving the Committee’s objectives over time, supported by stronger economic activity, widespread vaccinations and the associated reduction in social dis- tancing, and accommodative fiscal and monetary policy. Some participants pointed to the continued increase in market-based measures of inflation compensation from the very low levels recorded in the spring as consistent _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 26–27, 2021Page 15 with the view that inflation was likely to move up grad- ually over time; others noted that survey-based measures were little changed, on net, over the year as a whole. Participants noted that overall financial conditions re- mained highly accommodative, in part reflecting inves- tors’ optimism about the economic outlook along with the accommodative stance of monetary policy and re- cent and expected future fiscal policy measures. How- ever, a few participants remarked that credit conditions were relatively tight for borrowers with low credit scores and for some small and medium-sized businesses that rely on bank lending rather than capital markets to meet their financing needs. While generally acknowledging that the medium-term outlook for real GDP growth and employment had im- proved, participants continued to see the uncertainty surrounding that outlook as elevated. Participants agreed that the path of the economy depended signifi- cantly on the course of the virus and progress on vac- cinations. Many participants remarked that the pan- demic continued to pose considerable risks to the eco- nomic outlook, including risks associated with new virus strains, potential public resistance to vaccination, and potential difficulties in the production and distribution of vaccines. With regard to upside risks, some partici- pants pointed to the possibility that fiscal policy could turn out to be more expansionary than anticipated, that households could display greater willingness to spend out of accumulated savings than expected, or that wide- spread vaccinations and easing of social distancing could result in a more rapid boost to spending and employ- ment than anticipated. Participants generally viewed the risks to the outlook for inflation as having become more balanced than was the case over most of 2020, although most still viewed the risks as weighted to the downside. As an upside risk to inflation, several participants noted the potential for pandemic-related supply constraints to affect price inflation somewhat more than anticipated or for price increases among industries most adversely af- fected by the pandemic to be more pronounced than projected. A number of participants commented on issues related to financial stability. Several participants noted areas of strength. For example, the banking system had shown considerable resilience since the onset of the pandemic. Banks’ capital positions had generally remained solid, and earnings were strong. In addition, results from the most recent stress tests indicated that the largest banks could withstand very stressed economic conditions. That said, a few participants stated that it would be im- portant to stay vigilant to ensure that the banking system remained strong and resilient. In addition, several par- ticipants noted that the pandemic had highlighted struc- tural vulnerabilities in other parts of the financial system. These included run-prone investment funds in short- term funding and credit markets as well as fragilities in Treasury market functioning; stresses stemming from these vulnerabilities had required substantial interven- tion by the Federal Reserve in the turbulent market con- ditions at the onset of the pandemic. A couple of par- ticipants commented that it would be important for the appropriate regulatory bodies to address these financial stability vulnerabilities. Regarding asset valuations, some participants commented that equity valuations had risen further, that initial public offering activity was ele- vated, or that valuations might have been affected by re- tail investors trading through electronic platforms. In addition, risk spreads on corporate bonds and loans were generally low, even with corporate indebtedness having risen to high levels. A few participants noted that some CRE in sectors that had been most directly af- fected by the pandemic—such as those involving retail establishments and hotels—faced the prospect of falling prices and increased stress. In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed the Federal Reserve’s commit- ment to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy during this challenging time, thereby pro- moting the Committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. Participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccina- tions, and that the ongoing public health crisis had con- tinued to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation. Participants noted that as the pandemic had worsened across the country in recent months, the pace of the recovery had moderated, with weakness concen- trated in the sectors most adversely affected by the pan- demic. In contrast, participants remarked that the pro- spect of an effective vaccine program, the recently en- acted fiscal support, and the potential for additional fis- cal actions had led them to judge that the medium-term outlook had improved. That said, participants agreed that the economy remained far from the Committee’s longer-run goals and that the path ahead remained highly uncertain, with the pandemic continuing to pose consid- erable risks to the outlook. In their discussion of the outlook for monetary policy, participants judged that maintaining a highly accommo- dative stance of policy was essential to foster further Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ economic recovery and to achieve an average inflation rate of 2 percent over time. Participants noted that eco- nomic conditions were currently far from the Commit- tee’s longer-run goals and that the stance for policy would need to remain accommodative until those goals were achieved. Consequently, all participants supported maintaining the Committee’s current settings and out- come-based guidance for the federal funds rate and the pace of asset purchases. Participants noted that the Committee’s current guid- ance was well suited to the current environment because it describes how policy would respond based on the path of the economy. For example, if progress toward the Committee’s goals proved slower than anticipated, the outcome-based guidance would convey the Committee’s intention to respond by increasing monetary policy ac- commodation through maintaining the current level of the target range of the federal funds rate for longer and raising the expected path of the Federal Reserve’s bal- ance sheet. In addition, participants noted that the Com- mittee’s current outcome-based guidance for both the federal funds rate and balance sheet appeared to be well understood by the public. In that context, participants emphasized that it was important to abstract from tem- porary factors affecting inflation—such as low past lev- els of prices dropping out of measures of annual price changes or relative price increases in some sectors brought about by supply constraints or disruptions—in judging whether inflation was on track to moderately ex- ceed 2 percent for some time. Participants noted that the increase in the Federal Re- serve’s balance sheet since last March had materially eased financial conditions and was providing substantial support to the economy. The Committee’s guidance for asset purchases indicated that asset purchases would continue at least at the current pace until substantial fur- ther progress toward its employment and inflation goals had been achieved. With the economy still far from those goals, participants judged that it was likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. Various participants noted the importance of the Committee clearly communicating its assessment of progress toward its longer-run goals well in advance of the time when it could be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of purchases. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. They noted that the pace of recovery in economic activity and employment had moderated in recent months, with weakness concentrated in sectors most adversely af- fected by the pandemic. Weaker demand and earlier de- clines in oil prices had been holding down consumer price inflation. Overall financial conditions remained ac- commodative, in part reflecting policy measures to sup- port the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. house- holds and businesses. Members also stated that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. In addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis had continued to weigh on economic activ- ity, employment, and inflation and was posing consider- able risks to the economic outlook. Members agreed that the pandemic continued to pose considerable risks to the outlook. Nonetheless, in light of the expected progress on vaccinations and the change in the outlook for fiscal policy, the medium-term pro- spects for the economy had improved enough that members decided that the reference in previous post- meeting statements to risks to the economic outlook over the medium term was no longer warranted. Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was commit- ted to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. All members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the Com- mittee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and in- flation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expecta- tions remain well anchored at 2 percent. Members ex- pected to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until those outcomes were achieved. All members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels con- sistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, members agreed that it would be appropri- ate for the Federal Reserve to continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 26–27, 2021Page 17 had been made toward the Committee’s maximum-em- ployment and price-stability goals. They judged that these asset purchases would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Members also agreed that, in as- sessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective January 28, 2021, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. • • Increase the System Open Market Ac- count holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mort- gage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 bil- lion per month. Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mort- gage-backed securities (CMBS) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. • Conduct repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar funding markets. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-coun- terparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate set- tlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. The COVID-19 pandemic is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. The pace of the recovery in economic activity and em- ployment has moderated in recent months, with weakness concentrated in the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic. Weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices have been holding down consumer price inflation. Overall financial conditions remain in part reflecting policy accommodative, measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The path of the economy will depend signifi- cantly on the course of the virus, including pro- gress on vaccinations. The ongoing public health crisis continues to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 per- cent over the longer run. With inflation run- ning persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so Page 18Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee ex- pects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum em- ployment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, the Federal Re- serve will continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securi- ties by at least $40 billion per month until sub- stantial further progress has been made toward the Committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. These asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and ac- commodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of mone- tary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming infor- mation for the economic outlook. The Com- mittee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assess- ments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pres- sures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, Randal K. Quarles, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. The Board of Governors also voted unan- imously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective Janu- ary 28, 2021. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, March 16– 17, 2021. The meeting adjourned at 10:25 a.m. on Janu- ary 27, 2021. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on January 5, 2021, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 15–16, 2020. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 26–27, 2021Page 19 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee March 16–17, 2021 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconfer- ence on Tuesday, March 16, 2021, at 11:00 a.m. and con- tinued on Wednesday, March 17, 2021, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Mary C. Daly Charles L. Evans Randal K. Quarles Christopher J. Waller James Bullard, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Kartik B. Athreya, Brian M. Doyle, Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, Sylvain Leduc, Anna Paulson, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Margie Shanks, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, and Chiara Scotti, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Elizabeth Klee, Senior Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; David E. Lebow and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Don H. Kim and Ellen E. Meade, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; David López-Salido, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Stephanie E. Curcuru, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Norman J. Morin and Paul A. Smith, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Brent Bundick, Research and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jennifer Gallagher, Special Assistant to the Board, Michael Koslow,2 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Bank of New York Brian J. Bonis, Michiel De Pooter, and Zeynep Senyuz,2 Fernando M. Martin, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Bank of St. Louis Alyssa G. Anderson,2 Section Chief, Division of Federal Reserve Bank of New York William G. O’Boyle,2 Policy and Markets Manager, Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Penelope A. Beattie,2 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Mark A. Carlson, Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo, Sebastian Infante, and Ander Perez- Orive, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Lead Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Anthony Sarver,2 Senior Financial Institution Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Ellen J. Bromagen, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Michael Dotsey, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Anne Baum, Edward S. Knotek II, Giovanni Olivei, Paula Tkac, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, Boston, Atlanta, and Minneapolis, respectively Kathryn B. Chen2 and Jonathan P. McCarthy, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Brett Rose,2 Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Anthony Murphy, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Michael Junho Lee,2 Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Action to Adopt Changes to the Committee’s Rules Regarding Availability of Information By unanimous vote, the Committee approved a final rule that revises its Rules Regarding Availability of Infor- mation, which are the Committee’s Freedom of Infor- mation Act (FOIA) rules. The revised FOIA rules, which include a range of minor and technical updates, will become effective 30 days after the forthcoming pub- lication of the final rule in the Federal Register. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments. In the United States, the trend toward higher longer-term yields observed in recent months accelerated over the intermeeting period, and far-forward real rates based on Treasury Inflation- Protected Securities (TIPS) rose considerably. Market participants highlighted an improving economic out- look, bolstered by passage of the American Rescue Plan (ARP) and progress on vaccinations, as underlying the increase in yields. Model- and survey-based estimates suggested that a significant portion of the increase in yields was associated with an increase in term premiums. Higher term premiums could reflect the outlook for more expansive fiscal policy and an associated upward revision in the expected path for Treasury debt out- standing. Increased uncertainty over the outlook for longer-term interest rates as well as technical factors may also have contributed to the rise in term premiums. The Treasury market functioned well over most of the pe- riod, although measures of market liquidity deteriorated somewhat toward the end of February. Conditions gradually improved, although some measures of market liquidity had not fully returned to earlier levels. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Rates implied by interest rate futures maturing over the next several years rose notably over the intermeeting pe- riod, reportedly reflecting a reassessment by market par- ticipants of the expected path of the target range for the federal funds rate. Since the January meeting, the date of the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate implied by a straight read of market pricing moved notably earlier to the first quarter of 2023, and the implied target rate at the end of 2023 rose around 50 basis points. However, responses to the Open Mar- ket Desk surveys suggested more modest changes to policy rate expectations. The probability-weighted mean survey expectation for the target rate at the end of 2023 rose only around 5 basis points. Expectations for economic conditions at the time of the first increase in the target range, as measured by the Desk surveys, appeared to remain broadly consistent with the Committee’s policy framework and forward guidance. Expectations from the Desk surveys for the path of asset purchases were little changed. Contacts noted that these expectations have been held steady by policymaker communications emphasizing both the need to see realized progress toward the Committee’s goals and the intent to communicate well in advance of the time when progress could be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of purchases. Alongside the rise in U.S. yields, broad U.S. equity price indexes increased moderately, with the largest gains in cyclically sensitive sectors. The rise in U.S. yields was also accompanied by increases in sovereign yields in other advanced economies. Some central banks re- sponded to these yield increases with adjustments to op- erations; others suggested that the rising yields reflected improvements in the outlook. The deputy manager discussed the evolution of the Fed- eral Reserve’s balance sheet and related developments in money markets. Reserve balances rose more than $400 billion, on net, over the intermeeting period to $3.7 trillion, while Treasury bills outstanding decreased more than $200 billion. Against this backdrop, the ef- fective federal funds rate softened modestly, while re- purchase agreement (repo) rates declined to a greater ex- tent. Moreover, market participants projected that re- serves would grow at a historically rapid pace in coming months, reflecting continued expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet along with a projected draw- down in the balances maintained in the Treasury General Account. Market contacts suggested that continued rapid expansion of reserves could put further downward pressure on money market rates. The deputy manager noted that the earliest and most pronounced pressure was likely to be observed in overnight secured financing markets, and there could be increasing usage of the over- night reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility. In light of the potential for expanded use of the ON RRP facility, the staff had conducted a review to ensure that the terms of the facility and its counterparty base were well positioned to continue to support effective policy implementation. By offering a broad range of money market lenders an outside investment option, the ON RRP facility enhances lenders’ bargaining power in negotiating rates on short-term private investments and thus helps establish a floor on overnight money market rates. The facility can also alleviate downward pressure on overnight rates associated with reserve growth by broadening the range of liabilities that support the Fed- eral Reserve’s balance sheet expansion. The review rec- ommended raising the ON RRP per-counterparty limit from $30 billion to $80 billion. The $30 billion limit had been established a number of years ago, and the amount of credit intermediated through money markets had grown substantially since then. The increase in the limit to $80 billion would restore the capacity of the facility relative to the aggregate size of money fund counterpar- ties to roughly the level in place when the facility was established. The staff would also monitor money market conditions on an ongoing basis to assess whether any additional adjustments were needed to the ON RRP fa- cility terms. In addition to changes to the ON RRP parameters, the deputy manager also noted that the Federal Reserve could consider adjusting its administered rates if undue downward pressure on overnight rates emerged. Re- sponses to the Desk surveys indicated that many market participants anticipated adjustments to the interest on excess reserves rate and the ON RRP rate at or before the June meeting. Finally, in light of more normal con- ditions in agency commercial mortgage-backed securi- ties (CMBS) markets, the Desk planned to conduct agency CMBS operations as needed to sustain smooth market functioning but would cease regularly scheduled CMBS operations. In their discussion following the Desk briefings, partici- pants noted that the ON RRP facility had been very ef- fective in establishing a firm floor for the federal funds rate and supporting monetary policy implementation. Participants commented that the facility would continue to be an important part of the monetary policy imple- mentation framework going forward, particularly in Minutes of the Meeting of March 16–17, 2021Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ coming months with reserve levels projected to rise rap- idly. Participants broadly supported the proposed in- crease in the counterparty limit, and a few participants also noted that they would support removing the limit altogether. A few participants suggested that some type of dynamic or differential limit could be considered in the future to enable the ON RRP facility to adapt more readily to market developments. A few participants noted that the concerns at the time the facility was es- tablished about possible adverse effects of the ON RRP facility on financial stability and the structure of money markets had not materialized. Indeed, over the spring of 2020, the facility played an important role in helping stabilize money market conditions. In light of the po- tential for greater use of the ON RRP facility going for- ward in connection with the expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and associated downward pres- sure on overnight rates, a couple of participants noted that it might be useful to review lessons learned regard- ing the ON RRP facility since its inception. Following the discussion, the Chair noted the potential for downward pressure on money market rates and sug- gested that, should undue downward pressure on over- night rates emerge, it might be appropriate to implement adjustments to administered rates at upcoming meetings or even between meetings to support effective policy im- plementation and ensure that the federal funds rate re- mains well within the target range. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. No intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the System’s account during the intermeeting period. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activ- ity in the United States and abroad. The information available at the time of the March 16–17 meeting sug- gested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) was expanding in the first quarter of 2021 at a pace that was faster than in the fourth quarter of last year, although the level of real GDP had likely not yet returned to the level seen before the onset of the pandemic. Labor market conditions improved in January and February, but em- ployment was still well below its level at the start of 2020. Consumer price inflation through January—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)—re- mained well below 2 percent. Total nonfarm payroll employment increased solidly over January and February after softening at the end of last year. As of February, payroll employment had re- traced somewhat more than half of the losses seen since the onset of the pandemic. The unemployment rate fell to 6.2 percent in February. The unemployment rates for Hispanics and Asians declined, on balance, over January and February, while the unemployment rate for African Americans was unchanged on net; the rates for both Af- rican Americans and Hispanics remained well above the national average. Even though the labor force participa- tion rate edged down, the employment-to-population ra- tio moved up somewhat over January and February; both measures remained below their pre-pandemic lev- els. Initial claims for unemployment insurance in early March were at their lowest level since November of last year. Weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls con- structed by Federal Reserve Board staff using data pro- vided by the payroll processor ADP indicated that the four-week average increase in private employment at the end of February was about the same as it had been in the middle of the month, when the Bureau of Labor Statis- tics collects payroll employment data. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 5.3 per- cent over the 12 months ending in February, and labor compensation per hour in the business sector increased 6.6 percent over the four quarters of 2020. The gains in both these measures, however, continued to be domi- nated by changes in the composition of the workforce. In particular, the concentration of job losses among lower-wage workers since early last year had resulted in outsized increases in average hourly earnings and com- pensation per hour that were not indicative of tight labor market conditions. By contrast, the employment cost index of total hourly compensation in the private sector rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months of last year, and a staff estimate of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the ADP data was 3.2 percent in Jan- uary. These measures are likely to have been less af- fected by changes in workforce composition, and they were rising more slowly than their pre-pandemic pace. Total PCE price inflation was 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending in January and continued to be held down by slack in resource utilization. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, also was 1.5 per- cent over the 12 months ending in January, while the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE inflation con- structed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 1.7 percent in January. In February, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 1.7 per- cent, while core CPI inflation was 1.3 percent over the same period. The latest readings on survey-based Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. In early March, the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers preliminary measure for the next 5 to 10 years was the same as in the previous two months, while in February, the 3-year-ahead meas- ure of inflation expectations produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York was essentially unchanged from its January level. The Survey of Professional Fore- casters measure of PCE price inflation over the next 10 years edged up in the first quarter, returning to its pre- pandemic level. A staff index of common inflation ex- pectations, which summarizes the co-movement of a wide variety of inflation expectations measures, was at about the same level in the fourth quarter of last year as in the third quarter. Consumer spending appeared to be increasing in the first quarter at a pace considerably faster, on balance, than in the fourth quarter of last year. Real PCE ex- panded strongly in January after declining over the pre- ceding two months, with spending likely boosted by fed- eral stimulus payments sent out in early January. The components of the nominal retail sales data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to estimate PCE pointed to a step-down in spending in February, but revised data for the previous month suggested an even stronger gain in January. Spending in March was expected to be boosted by additional federal stimulus payments from the ARP, which started to be distributed around the mid- dle of the month. In addition, the personal saving rate jumped to an even higher level in January, and ongoing gains in labor earnings along with further fiscal support pointed to additional increases in accumulated house- hold savings. Moreover, the preliminary reading of con- sumer sentiment from the Michigan survey moved up notably in early March to its highest level over the past year, reportedly reflecting the growing number of vac- cinations and the enactment of the ARP, although con- sumer sentiment remained below its levels from just be- fore the onset of the pandemic. Construction of single-family homes and home sales re- mained well above their pre-pandemic levels. However, the incoming data for this sector were mixed. Starts of single-family homes moved down notably over January and February, in part likely reflecting severe winter weather in February. Starts of multifamily units also fell in February but by less than the strong increase seen in January. Construction permits for single-family homes moved down, on net, over January and February, point- ing to some slowing in construction in coming months. Sales of both new and existing homes increased further in January, and home prices continued to rise briskly. Business investment in equipment and intangibles was continuing to increase in the first quarter after rising ap- preciably in the fourth quarter of last year. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding air- craft expanded strongly in January, and rising orders for these goods pointed to further gains in business equip- ment spending in coming months. Business investment in the drilling and mining sector appeared to be increas- ing further after turning up sharply in the fourth quarter, as crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indica- tor of drilling investment—continued to rise through early March with oil prices moving higher. Nominal nonresidential construction spending rose somewhat in January, but investment in nonresidential structures out- side of the drilling and mining sector looked to remain weak in the current quarter after declining further in the fourth quarter, reflecting continued hesitation by busi- nesses to commit to building projects with lengthy times to completion and uncertain future returns. Industrial production continued to rise solidly in January but then fell markedly in February, largely reflecting de- clines in manufacturing and mining sector output caused by severe winter weather in the south central region of the country in the middle of that month. Along with the severe weather, a cutback in the production of motor vehicles and parts also reflected a global shortage of semiconductors. New orders indexes in national and re- gional manufacturing surveys pointed toward solid in- creases in factory output in the coming months, al- though reports of shortages in materials and labor, as well as bottlenecks in transportation, signaled some po- tential restraints on the pace of the manufacturing recov- ery. Total real government purchases appeared to be rising in the first quarter after edging down in the fourth quar- ter. Although data through February indicated that de- fense spending was moving down, a likely bounceback in nondefense spending was expected to lift total federal purchases. State and local government purchases looked to be increasing, as the payrolls of these governments expanded, on net, over January and February, and nom- inal state and local construction spending increased sol- idly in January. Moreover, additional federal support for state and local governments included in the ARP, along with an improved outlook for state and local tax reve- nues, pointed to further notable increases in state and local purchases. Data for December and January showed a narrower nominal U.S. international trade deficit than in Novem- ber. Both imports and exports continued to rebound Minutes of the Meeting of March 16–17, 2021Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ from their collapse in the first half of last year. Goods imports in January were much higher than a year earlier, with continued gains in most categories. Nominal goods exports in January nearly recovered to their level from a year earlier, with particular strength in exports of capital goods and industrial supplies. Services imports and ex- ports remained depressed, weighed down by the contin- ued suspension of most international travel. Recent data pointed to a slowdown in economic activity across foreign economies around the turn of the year, as tight social-distancing restrictions were imposed to rein in a new wave of COVID-19 infections in various parts of the world, most notably in Europe and Latin America. Even so, economies appeared to be better adapted to operating under restrictions than during previous waves of infections. Manufacturing activity continued to gen- erally outperform activity in the services sector, and manufactured exports from China and some other Asian economies remained strong, especially to the United States. Inflation rebounded in many foreign economies, reflecting rising energy prices and other temporary fac- tors. However, underlying inflationary pressures re- mained subdued. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investors appeared to have become more optimistic about the economic outlook over the intermeeting pe- riod against the backdrop of progress on COVID-19 vaccinations, signs of stronger domestic spending, and additional fiscal stimulus. The nominal Treasury yield curve steepened markedly, largely because of increases in longer-term real yields, although measures of inflation compensation also increased further. Despite the spikes in equity market volatility early in the intermeeting pe- riod, spurred by heavy trading concentrated in a few spe- cific stocks and subsequent concerns over the rapid rise in longer-term interest rates, broad equity price indexes rose on net. Consistent with the stronger outlook, spreads on high-yield corporate bonds narrowed. Fi- nancing conditions for businesses with access to capital markets and households with high credit scores re- mained broadly accommodative, but conditions stayed tight for other borrowers. The Treasury yield curve steepened over the intermeet- ing period, with 5- and 10-year yields rising markedly. Measures of inflation compensation increased moder- ately, on net, continuing the trend observed over recent months. However, in contrast to recent months, most of the recent increase in longer-term Treasury yields was accounted for by higher TIPS-implied real yields. Mar- ket participants attributed the increases in longer-term yields in part to increased investor optimism about the economic outlook and expectations of higher Treasury debt issuance. On February 25, yields rose especially sharply. Market depth became thin, and bid-ask spreads widened, but Treasury market liquidity gradually recov- ered over the following days. Swaption-implied volatili- ties of longer-term interest rates rose notably. The expected path for the federal funds rate over the next few years, as implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes, rose substantially since the previous FOMC meeting and moved above 25 basis points in the first quarter of 2023, about three quarters sooner than expected at the time of the January meeting. Broad stock price indexes increased, on net, over the in- termeeting period, consistent with increased investor optimism about the economic outlook and the enact- ment of the ARP. Stocks in cyclically sensitive industries such as energy, banking, and small caps recorded sizable gains, while other sectors experienced mixed perfor- mance. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—fluctuated over a wide range dur- ing the intermeeting period but moved lower on balance. Spreads of corporate bond yields over comparable- maturity Treasury yields were roughly unchanged on investment-grade corporate bonds but narrowed for speculative-grade bonds. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period. Spreads on commer- cial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit across different tenors were little changed and remained near historically low levels. Assets under management (AUM) of government money market funds (MMFs) rose over the intermeeting period, whereas AUM of prime MMFs declined somewhat. The effective federal funds rate and the Secured Over- night Financing Rate averaged 7 basis points and 3 basis points, respectively, over the intermeeting period, de- creasing somewhat relative to the previous intermeeting period average amid a net decrease in Treasury bill issu- ance and rising reserves. There continued to be no par- ticipation in the Federal Reserve’s repo operations, but participation in the Federal Reserve’s ON RRP increased a little. Amid stable market conditions, there was no take-up in the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Fa- cility or the Commercial Paper Funding Facility. Improved U.S. economic growth prospects and opti- mism about the eventual lifting of social-distancing and related restrictions globally were major drivers of asset prices abroad, spurring sizable increases in sovereign Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ yields in advanced foreign economies. In response to rising yields, the Reserve Bank of Australia increased its bond purchases, and the European Central Bank indi- cated it would increase the pace of its bond purchases going forward. The broad dollar index rose modestly, with more notable appreciation against currencies of emerging market economies (EMEs). EME sovereign spreads edged up, and flows into EME bond funds fell back later in the period amid the rise in yields in ad- vanced economies. However, flows into dedicated EME equity funds remained strong. Overall, foreign eq- uity indexes increased slightly in most major markets. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses in cap- ital markets remained broadly accommodative over the intermeeting period, supported by low interest rates and high equity valuations. Gross and net corporate bond issuances were solid in January and February. Gross is- suance of leveraged loans was strong in January, driven mainly by refinancing activity, as primary-market spreads compressed notably since the end of last year in re- sponse to strong investor demand for such loans. Eq- uity raised through traditional initial public offerings and seasoned equity offerings continued to be strong in Jan- uary and February, and initial equity offerings by special purpose acquisition companies remained exceptionally high. Commercial and industrial loans outstanding on banks’ balance sheets continued to decline through Feb- ruary as loan paydowns persisted and demand for new bank credit reportedly remained subdued. Corporate earnings continued to recover while the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations improved further. Corporate bond defaults declined in December and Jan- uary and reached levels substantially below their 2019 average. In addition, the volume of nonfinancial corpo- rate credit rating upgrades modestly outpaced down- grades over the first two months of 2021. Market indi- cators of future default expectations moved lower. Financing conditions for small businesses remained tight. Demand for loans remained depressed—and loan originations fell in December last year to about the same level seen in August—after the spike in lending associ- ated with the first round of the Paycheck Protection Pro- gram. Long-term delinquencies remained elevated rela- tive to recent years but were at levels significantly below those experienced during the Global Financial Crisis. Municipal market financing conditions stayed accom- modative over the intermeeting period. For commercial real estate (CRE) financed through cap- ital markets, financing conditions remained accommo- dative over the intermeeting period. Agency CMBS spreads narrowed further with strong issuance in De- cember and January. Spreads on non-agency CMBS also tightened, although triple-B spreads stayed at elevated levels compared with pre-pandemic levels. Issuance of non-agency CMBS remained weak relative to pre- pandemic levels. CRE loan growth at banks was weak, on net, through February, consistent with tight bank lending standards. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market tightened somewhat over the intermeeting period but re- mained accommodative for stronger borrowers. Mort- gage rates for most borrowers increased but stayed near historically low levels, supporting elevated refinance and purchase activity through January. Credit was broadly available to higher-score borrowers meeting standard conforming loan criteria but tightened further for bor- rowers with lower credit scores. The share of mortgages in forbearance was unchanged. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re- mained generally accommodative for borrowers with strong credit scores but were still tight for those with nonprime scores. Auto loan balances continued to grow in January, while credit card balances declined. Interest rates on new credit card offers to borrowers with prime credit scores continued to trend down, on net, through December. In contrast, offer rates to nonprime borrow- ers rose further. Conditions in the asset-backed securi- ties market were stable during the intermeeting period. Staff Economic Outlook The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the March FOMC meeting was considerably stronger than the January forecast. Real GDP growth appeared to be picking up at the beginning of this year by more than the staff had expected, likely reflecting both a faster-than-anticipated easing in social distancing and a more rapid response by households to the fiscal support package enacted in late December. Moreover, the size of the ARP enacted in March was considerably larger than what the staff had assumed in the January projec- tion. All told, real GDP growth was projected to be sub- stantial this year and the unemployment rate was fore- cast to decline markedly, as the staff’s projection also continued to anticipate that widespread vaccination would allow for further easing in social distancing this year. Real GDP growth was expected to step down in 2022 and 2023 but still outpace that of potential over this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels, as monetary policy was as- sumed to remain highly accommodative. Minutes of the Meeting of March 16–17, 2021Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Incoming data on inflation were a little above what the staff had expected. The 12-month changes in total and core PCE prices were expected to transitorily move above 2 percent in coming months, as the low inflation readings from the spring of last year dropped out of the calculation window. In addition, inflation was forecast to be temporarily boosted this year by the expected emergence of some production bottlenecks and supply constraints. Following the transitory increase this year, inflation was projected to run a bit below 2 percent next year and then to reach 2 percent by 2023, reflecting tight resource utilization in product and labor markets. The staff continued to see the uncertainty surrounding the outlook as elevated. Moreover, the uncertain course of the pandemic, particularly the emergence of more- contagious strains of the coronavirus in the United States and elsewhere, was still viewed as tilting the risks to the economic outlook to the downside. However, given the resilience of the economy in the face of the earlier surge in new COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths and the magnitude of fiscal support enacted, the downside risks to the economic outlook were seen as smaller than for the previous projection. The staff viewed the risks of upside inflationary pressures as hav- ing increased since the previous forecast and now saw the risks to the inflation projection as balanced. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2021 through 2023 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of ap- propriate monetary policy, including the path of the fed- eral funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, un- der appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Eco- nomic Projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. In their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tre- mendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Following a mod- eration in the pace of the recovery, indicators of eco- nomic activity and employment had turned up recently, although the sectors most adversely affected by the pan- demic remained weak. Inflation continued to run below 2 percent. Overall financial conditions remained accom- modative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Participants noted that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations, and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook. Participants observed that the pace of the economic re- covery had picked up recently and that the economy continued to show resilience in the face of the pandemic. They noted encouraging developments regarding the pandemic, including significant declines in the number of new cases, hospitalizations, and deaths over the inter- meeting period as well as a pickup in the pace of vac- cinations. In light of these developments as well as the extent of the recent fiscal policy support, participants significantly revised up their projections for real GDP growth this year compared with the projections they submitted last December. They noted, however, that economic activity and employment were currently well below levels consistent with maximum employment. Participants observed that the economic downturn had not fallen equally on all Americans and that lower- income and Black and Hispanic households had been disproportionately affected by the pandemic. A number of participants stressed that recently enacted fiscal sup- port would help address some of the hardships faced by these groups and that monetary policy would also help by promoting the economy’s return to the Committee’s goals of broad-based and inclusive maximum employ- ment and price stability. Participants observed that household spending had risen notably so far this year and anticipated that further gains in consumer spending would contribute significantly to the economic recovery. While household spending on services that typically require close personal contact re- mained weak, participants expected spending on these services would improve as vaccinations became more widespread, social-distancing measures were relaxed, and the public became less wary of close personal inter- actions. Participants anticipated consumer spending would be bolstered by the recently enacted fiscal stimu- lus packages as well as by accommodative monetary pol- icy. Many participants also pointed to the elevated level of household savings and judged that the release of pent- up demand could boost consumption growth further as social distancing waned. Participants also observed that residential construction continued to be solid and home Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ sales remained robust in part because of low interest rates. Low inventory was viewed as an important factor supporting strong gains in housing prices. With respect to the business sector, participants ob- served that business equipment investment had contin- ued to increase and that readings on new orders and shipments of capital goods remained strong. While some District contacts continued to report that firms in industries such as CRE or leisure, travel, and hospitality were struggling from pandemic-related social distancing, other District contacts reported that activity in these in- dustries had started to improve. Participants noted that surveys of business activity had picked up recently and that many District contacts were growing increasingly optimistic about business prospects given ongoing pro- gress on vaccinations. Participants also discussed re- ports of shortages in materials, key intermediate inputs, and labor as well as bottlenecks in shipping. A few par- ticipants noted that higher crop prices were continuing to boost income in the agricultural sector. Several par- ticipants judged that the support provided by the ARP could improve the financial positions of small firms that had been adversely affected by the pandemic. Participants observed that labor market conditions had improved recently, as payroll employment registered strong gains in February and the unemployment rate fell to 6.2 percent. Even so, payroll employment was about 9.5 million jobs below its pre-pandemic level, and labor market conditions for those in the most disadvantaged communities were viewed as lagging behind those of other households. Moreover, participants noted that employment in the leisure and hospitality sector was still down substantially from its pre-pandemic level despite a sharp rebound in February. Participants generally ex- pected strong job gains to continue over coming months and into the medium term, supported by accommoda- tive fiscal and monetary policies as well as by continued progress on vaccinations, further reopening of sectors most affected by the pandemic, and the associated re- covery in economic activity. However, participants noted that the economy was far from achieving the Committee’s broad-based and inclusive goal of maxi- mum employment. Some participants commented that labor force participation continued to be held down by workers’ health concerns and additional childcare re- sponsibilities associated with virtual schooling and that the pace of recovery in the labor market would depend importantly on how rapidly those affected by these is- sues could rejoin the labor force. Several participants noted that the speed of the labor market recovery also depended on factors such as the movement of workers across industries and occupations in a restructuring economy or the effects of technological change on the demand for labor. Several participants suggested that the ARP could hasten the recovery, which could help limit longer-term damage in labor markets caused by the pandemic. Participants observed that headline PCE inflation con- tinued to run below 2 percent. In the near term, the 12-month change in PCE prices was expected to move above 2 percent as the low inflation readings from the spring of last year drop out of the calculation. Most par- ticipants also pointed to supply constraints that could contribute to price increases for some goods in coming months as the economy continued to reopen. After the transitory effects of these factors fade, however, partici- pants generally anticipated that annual inflation readings would edge down next year. Subsequently, participants expected that inflation would likely move along a trajec- tory consistent with achieving the Committee’s objec- tives over time, supported by strong aggregate demand, which participants expected would be driven in part by accommodative monetary and fiscal policies. Participants discussed market- and survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations and their implications for the inflation outlook. Market-based measures of inflation compensation at the 5- and 10-year horizons had continued to move up over the intermeet- ing period, while survey-based measures of inflation ex- pectations were little changed on balance. A number of participants indicated that the increases in market-based measures of inflation compensation from the very low levels of last spring were consistent with the view that inflation was likely to move along a path over time con- sistent with the Committee’s goals. Participants noted that overall financial conditions re- mained highly accommodative, in part reflecting the stance of monetary policy. Participants commented on the notable rise in longer-term Treasury yields that oc- curred over the intermeeting period and generally viewed it as reflecting the improved economic outlook, some firming in inflation expectations, and expectations for increased Treasury debt issuance. Disorderly condi- tions in Treasury markets or a persistent rise in yields that could jeopardize progress toward the Committee’s goals were seen as cause for concern. While overall fi- nancial conditions were still seen as accommodative, a number of participants remarked that financing condi- tions remained challenging for many small businesses. A Minutes of the Meeting of March 16–17, 2021Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ couple of participants expressed concern that highly ac- commodative financial conditions could lead to exces- sive risk-taking and the buildup of financial imbalances. While generally acknowledging that the medium-term outlook for real GDP growth and employment had im- proved, participants continued to see the uncertainty surrounding that outlook as elevated. Participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend sig- nificantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. Most participants indicated that the pandemic continued to pose considerable risks to the economic outlook, including risks associated with new more-contagious virus strains, obstacles in getting suffi- cient numbers of the public vaccinated, or social- distancing fatigue. A few participants pointed to risks associated with stress in the CRE sector or to risks asso- ciated with the unwinding of mortgage forbearance and eviction moratoriums provided to households. With re- gard to upside risks, some participants pointed to the possibility that fiscal policy could have a more expan- sionary effect than anticipated, that households could display a greater-than-expected willingness to spend out of accumulated savings, or that widespread vaccinations and easing of social distancing could result in a more rapid boost to spending and employment than antici- pated. Most participants noted that they viewed the risks to the outlook for inflation as broadly balanced. Several re- marked that supply disruptions and strong demand could push up price inflation more than anticipated. Several participants commented that the factors that had contributed to low inflation during the previous expan- sion could again exert more downward pressure on in- flation than expected. In their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the Federal Reserve’s commit- ment to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy during this challenging time, thereby promot- ing the Committee’s statutory goals of maximum em- ployment and price stability. Participants noted that in- dicators of economic activity and employment had turned up recently after a period of moderation, al- though the sectors most adversely affected by the pan- demic remained weak. Despite these positive indicators and an improved public health situation, participants agreed that the economy remained far from the Com- mittee’s longer-run goals and that the path ahead re- mained highly uncertain, with the pandemic continuing to pose considerable risks to the outlook. Consequently, participants judged that the current stance of policy and policy guidance remained appropriate to foster further economic recovery as well as to achieve inflation that av- erages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation ex- pectations that remain well anchored at 2 percent. Participants judged that the Committee’s current guid- ance for the federal funds rate and asset purchases was serving the economy well. They noted that a benefit of the outcome-based guidance was that it did not need to be recalibrated often in response to incoming data or the evolving outlook. Participants also noted the im- portance of communicating to the public that the exist- ing guidance, together with the new monetary policy framework as delineated in the revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, meant that the path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet depend on actual progress toward reaching the Committee’s maximum-employment and inflation goals. In particular, various participants noted that changes in the path of policy should be based primarily on observed outcomes rather than forecasts. Participants agreed that overall financial conditions were accommodative. They noted that the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases since last March had materially eased fi- nancial conditions and were providing substantial sup- port to the economy. Participants noted that it would likely be some time until substantial further progress to- ward the Committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals would be realized and that, con- sistent with the Committee’s outcome-based guidance, asset purchases would continue at least at the current pace until then. A number of participants highlighted the importance of the Committee clearly communicating its assessment of progress toward its longer-run goals well in advance of the time when it could be judged sub- stantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of asset purchases. The timing of such communications would depend on the evolution of the economy and the pace of progress toward the Committee’s goals. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. They noted that following a moderation in the pace of the re- covery, indicators of economic activity and employment had turned up recently, although the sectors most ad- versely affected by the pandemic remained weak. Infla- tion continued to run below 2 percent. Overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ credit to U.S. households and businesses. Members also remarked that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including pro- gress on vaccinations. In addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis continued to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation and was posing considerable risks to the economic outlook. Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was commit- ted to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. All members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the Com- mittee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and in- flation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expecta- tions remain well anchored at 2 percent. Members ex- pected to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until those outcomes were achieved. All members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels con- sistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, members agreed that it would be appropri- ate for the Federal Reserve to continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress had been made toward the Committee’s maximum- employment and price-stability goals. They judged that these asset purchases would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Members also agreed that, in as- sessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. With regard to the postmeeting statement, in light of the notably positive tone of recent data, members judged that it was appropriate to incorporate that development in the description of the economic situation with the lan- guage that “indicators of economic activity and employ- ment have turned up recently.” Members also deter- mined that, with oil prices having essentially retraced their pandemic-related declines, it was appropriate to re- move the reference to oil prices as a factor holding down consumer price inflation and to simply state that “infla- tion continues to run below 2 percent.” Regarding the directive to the Desk, members agreed that the directive should incorporate the proposed increase in the per- counterparty limit for the ON RRP facility to $80 billion. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in ac- cordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective March 18, 2021, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. • • Increase the System Open Market Ac- count holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mort- gage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 bil- lion per month. purchase Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by additional amounts and commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. agency • Conduct repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar funding markets. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $80 billion per day; the per- Minutes of the Meeting of March 16–17, 2021Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ counterparty limit can be temporarily in- creased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. The COVID-19 pandemic is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Following a moderation in the pace of the recovery, indi- cators of economic activity and employment have turned up recently, although the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak. Inflation continues to run below 2 per- cent. Overall financial conditions remain ac- commodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The path of the economy will depend signifi- cantly on the course of the virus, including pro- gress on vaccinations. The ongoing public health crisis continues to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running per- sistently below this longer-run goal, the Com- mittee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Com- mittee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and in- flation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, the Federal Reserve will continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 bil- lion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the Committee’s maxi- mum employment and price stability goals. These asset purchases help foster smooth mar- ket functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, Randal K. Quarles, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. The Board of Governors also voted unan- imously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective March 18, 2021. Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, April 27– 28, 2021. The meeting adjourned at 10:20 a.m. on March 17, 2021. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on February 16, 2021, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 26–27, 2021. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Minutes of the Meeting of March 16–17, 2021Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee April 27–28, 2021 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconfer- ence on Tuesday, April 27, 2021, at 9:30 a.m. and con- tinued on Wednesday, April 28, 2021, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Mary C. Daly Charles L. Evans Randal K. Quarles Christopher J. Waller James Bullard, Esther L. George, Naureen Hassan, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, and Chiara Scotti, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Carol C. Bertaut, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; David Bowman, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Diana Hancock, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Elizabeth Klee, Senior Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Brian M. Doyle, Brett Berger,2 Senior Adviser, Division of Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, Anna Paulson, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account International Finance, Board of Governors; Ellen E. Meade, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Marnie Gillis DeBoer and Min Wei, Associate Account Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Glenn Follette, Associate Director, 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of repurchase agreement arrangements. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Cleveland, respectively Ricardo Correa2 and Stephanie E. Curcuru,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Eric C. Engstrom, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Jennifer Gallagher, Special Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian J. Bonis, Michiel De Pooter,2 Giovanni Favara, Laura Lipscomb,2 and Zeynep Senyuz, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Byron Lutz and Matthias Paustian, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Anne Baum, Carlos Garriga, Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl,2 Mark L.J. Wright, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,2 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, St. Louis, Chicago, Minneapolis, and New York, respectively Matthew Nemeth,2 Pia Orrenius, Nicolas Petrosky- Nadeau, and Matthew D. Raskin,2 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Dallas, San Francisco, and New York, respectively Robert Lerman2 and William E. Riordan,2 Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and New York, respectively Mark Choi2 and Ellen Correia-Golay,2 Markets Officers, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and New York, respectively Penelope A. Beattie,2 Section Chief, Office of the Fatih Karahan and Jenny Tang, Senior Economists, Secretary, Board of Governors Mark A. Carlson,2 Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Michele Cavallo, Jonathan E. Goldberg, Edward Herbst, and Krista Schwarz, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Lead Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Courtney Demartini,2 Lead Financial Institution Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Anthony Sarver,2 Senior Financial Institution Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Kenneth C. Montgomery, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Michael Dotsey, Joseph W. Gruber, and Ellis W. Tallman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Boston, respectively Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The System Open Market Account (SOMA) manager first discussed developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. Financial conditions eased modestly as market participants continued to focus on progress toward economic reopening as well as support- ive monetary and fiscal policy. Equity prices rose, with the S&P 500 index reaching a record high, while Treas- ury yields, the dollar, and credit spreads declined mod- estly. The equity gains were broad based across sectors, though shares of small caps, as captured by the Russell 2000 index, declined. News regarding losses associated with a highly levered family investment office affected the equity prices of some large financial firms, but the broader financial market effects appeared limited. After rising sharply in recent months, longer-term Treas- ury yields declined modestly over the intermeeting pe- riod, even as market expectations for U.S. growth con- tinued to be revised higher. Contacts reported that the earlier increases in yields drew in a range of investors, including foreign institutions, pension funds, and insur- ance companies. Against this backdrop, term premiums as measured by term structure models and based on es- Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ timates using the Open Market Desk’s surveys of pri- mary dealers and market participants moved slightly lower. Nonetheless, market participants were attentive to the potential for rising yields going forward, and, in recent months, Desk survey respondents had increased the probability they attach to higher yields at the end of 2021. Regarding expectations for the policy outlook, the mar- ket- and survey-implied paths of the federal funds rate were both relatively little changed over the intermeeting period, and the modal survey path in later years contin- ued to imply that the target range would gradually in- crease to a level just over 2 percent in 2026. Expecta- tions for the path of asset purchases were also stable, and market participants remained focused on the Commit- tee’s communications about progress toward its goals. According to the median survey responses, the Federal Reserve’s net purchases of Treasury and agency securi- ties were expected to end three quarters after the first reduction in the pace of asset purchases, and the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate was expected to occur three quarters after that. Recent financial market developments across advanced economies reflected differing expectations for economic growth and monetary policy. Some countries that were expected to recoup COVID-19-related output losses earlier than others had seen larger yield increases and more appreciation in their currencies in recent months. Over the intermeeting period, the Bank of Canada an- nounced a reduction in the pace of its asset purchases and brought forward its forecast of when conditions would be met for an increase in its policy rate. The manager turned next to money markets and the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Reserve balances in- creased further this intermeeting period to a record level of $3.9 trillion. The effective federal funds rate was steady at 7 basis points. However, amid ongoing strong demand for safe short-term investments and reduced Treasury bill supply, the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) stood at 1 basis point throughout the pe- riod. The overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility continued to effectively support pol- icy implementation, and take-up peaked at more than $100 billion. A modest amount of trading in overnight repurchase agreement (repo) markets occurred at nega- tive rates, although this development appeared to largely reflect technical factors. The SOMA manager noted that downward pressure on overnight rates in coming months could result in conditions that warrant consider- ation of a modest adjustment to administered rates and could ultimately lead to a greater share of Federal Re- serve balance sheet expansion being channeled into ON RRP and other Federal Reserve liabilities. Although few survey respondents expected an adjustment to ad- ministered rates at the current meeting, more than half expected an adjustment by the end of the June FOMC meeting. The manager concluded with an update on three opera- tional issues. Following the review of the ON RRP fa- cility discussed at the previous meeting, the Desk planned to relax counterparty eligibility criteria for money funds and government-sponsored enterprises in order to allow smaller counterparties of these types to participate. The Desk also planned to make modest ad- justments to the allocation of Treasury outright pur- chases across maturity ranges to ensure that purchases remain roughly proportional to the outstanding amounts of Treasury securities. These minor technical adjust- ments would have no implications for the effects of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases on overall financial conditions. Finally, the manager requested that the Committee vote to maintain the standing U.S. dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements and to re- new the reciprocal currency arrangements with Canada and Mexico under the North American Framework Agreement. The Committee voted unanimously to renew the recip- rocal currency arrangements with the Bank of Canada and the Bank of Mexico; these arrangements are associ- ated with the Federal Reserve’s participation in the North American Framework Agreement of 1994. In ad- dition, the Committee voted unanimously to renew the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss Na- tional Bank. The votes to renew the Federal Reserve’s participation in these standing arrangements occur an- nually at the April or May FOMC meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Discussion of Repurchase Agreement Arrange- ments The staff briefed participants on the Federal Reserve’s experience with the daily repo operations with primary dealers that have been in place since September 2019 and the temporary Foreign and International Monetary Authorities (FIMA) Repo Facility established in March _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 27–28, 2021Page 3 last year. The briefing also reviewed considerations that could be relevant for policymakers’ judgments regarding whether these arrangements should become permanent standing facilities. The staff noted that repo operations have been a useful tool in controlling the federal funds rate by adding reserves to ensure that they remain ample and by limiting pressures in repo markets that could spill over into unsecured markets. In March 2020, repo op- erations worked in concert with other measures to man- age shocks to financial markets by stabilizing Treasury market conditions. Since June 2020, when the rate on overnight repo operations was raised relative to the rate of interest on excess reserves, repo operations have served as a backstop and there has been no substantive usage. Regarding considerations concerning a perma- nent standing repo facility, the briefing noted that stand- ing repo operations could be viewed as useful in fore- stalling funding strains that could spill over into other overnight markets and limit dealers’ intermediation ac- tivity in financial markets. However, a standing repo fa- cility could be seen as a form of liquidity support for nonbank financial institutions, and one that could create incentives for firms with access to the facility to take on more liquidity risk against eligible securities than would otherwise be the case. In discussing considerations for the establishment of a standing FIMA repo facility, the staff noted that such a facility could limit the propensity for foreign official institutions to execute large sales of U.S. Treasury securities in a stress environment that, in turn, could exacerbate strains in broader U.S. domestic financial markets. The briefing also noted some poten- tial drawbacks of such a facility, including less transpar- ency regarding its operations relative to other Federal Reserve facilities. In their discussion of considerations related to the estab- lishment of a standing repo facility as part of the Com- mittee’s overall approach to policy implementations in an ample reserves regime, a substantial majority of par- ticipants saw the potential benefits of an appropriately calibrated facility as outweighing the potential costs. Nearly all participants commented that a standing repo facility, by acting as a backstop, could help address pres- sures in the markets for U.S. Treasury securities and Treasury repo that could spill over to other funding mar- kets and impair the implementation and transmission of monetary policy. In this regard, a number of participants noted the potential for pressures in short-term funding markets to arise from time to time, even with monetary policy operating in an ample-reserves regime. Many par- ticipants noted that a standing facility could provide a timely and automatic response to incipient market pres- sures; they remarked that such pressures can be difficult to anticipate and, as a result, might not be as promptly addressed with discretionary operations. A few partici- pants noted that a standing repo facility could provide counterparties with additional flexibility in managing the composition of their holdings of high-quality liquid as- sets, potentially reducing the demand for reserves. A few participants cautioned that establishing a standing repo facility should not be viewed as a way of imple- menting monetary policy without an ample supply of re- serves. A couple of participants remarked that most of the benefits of a standing repo facility could be realized by the Federal Reserve maintaining readiness to conduct repo operations on short notice as needed, noting that such an arrangement could avoid some of the costs of a standing facility. A few participants mentioned that a standing repo facility could be perceived as a means of supporting the financing of the U.S. Treasury or as a per- manent Federal Reserve liquidity backstop for nonde- pository institutions; a couple of others called out the risk that such a facility could crowd out private market sources of liquidity provision. Participants noted that it would be important to carefully consider key design elements of a potential standing repo facility, including the pricing structure, counterpar- ties, and range of collateral accepted. A number of par- ticipants commented that the counterparties at such a fa- cility should include depository institutions. Several par- ticipants noted the facility’s design should be targeted specifically to enhance control of the federal funds rate rather than to limit volatility in the repo market. In their discussion of considerations related to the estab- lishment of a permanent FIMA repo facility, a vast ma- jority of participants saw the potential benefits as out- weighing the costs. Participants highlighted a number of benefits of a standing FIMA repo facility, with many noting that it could support smoother functioning in U.S. Treasury securities markets and U.S. financial mar- kets more broadly by providing foreign official holders of U.S. Treasury securities with an alternative to outright sales of these securities in times of market stress. A few participants noted that, had a FIMA repo facility been in place in March 2020, it likely would have significantly damped pressures in these markets caused by the abrupt need for dollar funding abroad. Several participants sug- gested that a standing FIMA repo facility could be viewed as complementing the existing dollar swap lines by extending access to dollar funding for a broader range of central banks and foreign official institutions. Partic- ipants also commented on some potential risks of a Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ standing FIMA repo facility, including less transparency in connection with FIMA repo operations relative to other Federal Reserve facilities. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activ- ity in the United States and abroad. The information available at the time of the April 27–28 meeting sug- gested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) had increased in the first quarter of 2021 at a pace that was faster than in the fourth quarter of last year but had not yet returned to its pre-pandemic level. Labor market conditions improved markedly in March, though em- ployment remained well below its level at the start of 2020. Consumer price inflation through February—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)—continued to run well below 2 percent. Total nonfarm payroll employment surged in March, with a notable gain in the leisure and hospitality sector. As of March, payroll employment had retraced almost two-thirds of the losses seen at the onset of the pan- demic. The unemployment rate declined to 6 percent in March, as the number of workers on temporary layoff continued to fall and the number on permanent layoff ticked down. Although the unemployment rates for Af- rican Americans and Hispanics fell, both rates remained well above the national average; in addition, the Asian unemployment rate moved up and was equal to the na- tional average in March. The labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio increased in March, though both measures remained below their pre- pandemic levels. Initial claims for unemployment insur- ance had moved down, on net, since mid-March and were at the lowest level since the beginning of the pan- demic, though they remained exceptionally high by pre- pandemic standards. Weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff us- ing data provided by the payroll processor ADP, which were available through the first half of April, suggested that the rate of increase in private employment had slowed somewhat relative to its earlier robust pace. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 4.2 per- cent over the 12 months ending in March. The 12-month change in average hourly earnings continued to be influenced by the effect of the pandemic on the composition of the workforce; in particular, the concen- tration of job losses among lower-wage workers since early last year had resulted in large increases in this meas- ure that were not indicative of tight labor market condi- tions. By contrast, a staff measure of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the ADP data was 3.1 percent in March and continued to run below its pre-pandemic pace; this measure had likely been less af- fected by shifts in the composition of the workforce. Total PCE price inflation was 1.6 percent over the 12 months ending in February and continued to be held down by low rates of resource utilization. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer en- ergy prices and many consumer food prices, was 1.4 per- cent over the 12 months ending in February, while the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE inflation con- structed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 1.6 percent in February. In March, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 2.6 percent, boosted by increases in consumer energy prices, while core CPI inflation was 1.6 percent over the same period. In the first quarter of 2021, the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, had returned to the level that prevailed in 2018. Real PCE declined in February; however, available indi- cators—including the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate PCE—pointed to a large in- crease in March and for the first quarter as a whole, with federal stimulus payments having likely supported the March increase. Housing starts bounced back in March following a weather-induced decline in February. Al- though existing home sales fell in February and March, the declines appeared to reflect continued limited avail- ability of homes for sale rather than weakening demand; in addition, February’s drop in new home sales was re- traced in March. Available indicators suggested that equipment and intan- gibles investment had increased in the first quarter of 2021, though at a slower pace than that seen in the fourth quarter of 2020. Likewise, drilling investment ap- peared to have moved up, boosted in part by higher en- ergy prices. However, investment in nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector looked as though it had declined further in the first quar- ter, likely reflecting ongoing uncertainty about the longer-term effects of the pandemic on businesses. Manufacturing output rebounded strongly in March fol- lowing weather-related disruptions to production in February. The March rise in factory output occurred de- spite lingering supply constraints; for example, weather- _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 27–28, 2021Page 5 damaged facilities in Texas used to produce petrochem- ical and plastic materials had not yet been fully repaired, and semiconductor shortages were still weighing on mo- tor vehicle production. Total real government purchases appeared to have moved up in the first quarter after having declined over the second half of 2020. Available data suggested that a jump in federal nondefense purchases had offset a de- cline in defense purchases; in addition, indicators of real state and local purchases pointed to a small first-quarter increase. Data for February showed a wider nominal U.S. interna- tional trade deficit than in January. Both imports and exports fell from their January levels, the first nominal decline in each since last May. Goods imports were held back in February by weakness in imports for automotive products and consumer goods but remained higher than their pre-pandemic level. Nominal goods exports in February were weak in most categories and were still be- low their pre-pandemic level. Imports and exports of services remained depressed, weighed down by the con- tinued suspension of most international travel. Incoming data were consistent with a sharp slowdown in foreign economic growth in the first quarter, follow- ing a tightening of social-distancing restrictions to con- tain new waves of COVID-19 infections. Nevertheless, the slowdown appeared less severe than observed de- clines in mobility would have suggested, underscoring that foreign economies continued to adapt to public health restrictions. The most recent indicators showed that economic activity in many advanced foreign econo- mies (AFEs) resumed expanding toward the end of the first quarter amid a partial easing of restrictions. How- ever, a new surge in infections in several countries in Latin America and South Asia, notably India, under- scored the fragility of the global recovery. Foreign head- line inflation rose considerably, boosted by temporary factors, such as the fading effects of steep price declines seen early last year and the pass-through of price in- creases for oil and other commodities. However, under- lying inflationary pressures appeared to have remained muted. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Investor sentiment improved over the intermeeting pe- riod, reflecting a pickup in the pace of vaccinations, pro- spects for infrastructure spending, and stronger-than-ex- pected labor market and retail sales data. Domestic eq- uity prices increased notably amid declining equity mar- ket volatility, and corporate bond spreads narrowed. The nominal Treasury yield curve was little changed, as were measures of inflation compensation. A straight read of overnight index swap quotes suggested that the expected path for the federal funds rate was little changed over the intermeeting period and that the ex- pected policy rate would remain below 25 basis points until the first quarter of 2023. Market-based financing conditions remained accommodative, and bank lending conditions eased markedly. Despite recent improve- ments, lending standards for commercial and industrial (C&I) and consumer loans remained tighter than pre- pandemic levels. Broad stock price indexes increased over the intermeet- ing period, with outperformance by technology stocks and stocks sensitive to consumer discretionary spending. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500— the VIX—declined, approaching the median level ob- served in the decade before the pandemic. Spreads of yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury yields nar- rowed moderately. Spreads on municipal bonds were little changed, with yields on such bonds remaining close to their lowest levels in more than 20 years. Domestic short-term funding markets remained stable. Funding rates stayed very low against the backdrop of continued paydowns in Treasury bills and substantial in- creases in reserve balances stemming from Federal Re- serve asset purchases as well as the drawdown in bal- ances maintained in the Treasury General Account asso- ciated with stimulus payments and other fiscal outlays. Assets under management increased somewhat for gov- ernment money market funds (MMFs) but declined slightly for prime MMFs. The weighted average ma- turity of government and prime MMFs remained ele- vated. The effective federal funds rate and the SOFR were little changed, averaging 7 basis points and 1 basis point, re- spectively, over the intermeeting period. There contin- ued to be no participation in the Fed’s repo operations. Participation in the Fed’s reverse repo facility increased from minimal levels to an average of $47 billion and reached $134 billion on the quarter-end date. Factors that had stressed foreign financial markets ear- lier this year—rising U.S. interest rates, resurging COVID-19 cases, and renewed lockdowns in a number of countries—appeared less concerning to global inves- tors over the intermeeting period. Most AFE equity in- dexes rose modestly, and most AFE sovereign bond yields were little changed. In emerging market econo- mies (EMEs), market optimism was tempered in part by rising COVID-19 cases. The broad EME equity price Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ index was little changed, while credit spreads widened somewhat in the most vulnerable EMEs. After robust inflows earlier this year, flows into EME-dedicated funds continued at a moderate pace. The broad dollar index fell modestly. Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses in cap- ital markets remained highly accommodative over the in- termeeting period, as reflected in low corporate bond yields and high price-to-earnings ratios in equity mar- kets. Gross corporate bond issuance and gross lever- aged loan issuance were robust in February and March. Equity raised through traditional initial public offerings (IPOs) and seasoned equity offerings, as well as through special purpose acquisition companies, continued to be substantial in March. C&I loans outstanding at banks expanded in February and March after contracting for more than half a year. In the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported easing standards, on net, for C&I loans across firms of all sizes over the first quarter. Banks also reported that demand for C&I loans weakened at large and middle-market firms and was basically unchanged at small firms. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations showed further signs of improvement for lower-rated firms. Following a modest uptick in February, the volume of nonfinancial corporate bond downgrades spiked in March, but the spike reflected the downgrades of a few large and highly rated investment-grade firms. In con- trast, for speculative-grade issuers, the volume of up- grades modestly exceeded that of downgrades in Febru- ary and March. Nonfinancial corporate bond defaults remained at low levels in February and March. Market indicators of future default expectations were little changed and stayed low. Financing conditions in the municipal bond market re- mained accommodative over the intermeeting period. Issuance of municipal bonds was strong in March, and indicators of the credit quality of municipal debt were little changed in February and March. Financing condi- tions for small businesses appeared to have improved, with demand for loans remaining subdued. Likely in part because of the Paycheck Protection Program, small business loan originations rose notably in February, the most recent month for which data were available, and were close to pre-pandemic levels. However, even amid improving financing conditions, many small businesses remained under financial stress. For commercial real estate (CRE) financed through cap- ital markets, financing conditions remained accommo- dative over the intermeeting period. Although overall delinquency rates in agency commercial mortgage- backed securities (CMBS) declined in the past few months, delinquency rates on hotel and retail mortgages in CMBS pools remained high. CRE loans held by banks were little changed in March. In the April SLOOS, changes in lending standards over the first quarter were mixed across CRE loan categories. Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were little changed over the intermeeting period and re- mained accommodative for stronger borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. Credit remained tight for borrowers with lower credit scores. Mortgage rates for most borrowers were little changed on net. In the April SLOOS, banks reported easing standards on most types of mortgages. The share of mortgages in forbear- ance declined slightly in March. Financing conditions in consumer credit markets gener- ally remained accommodative for borrowers with strong credit scores but tight for those with subprime scores. Consumer loans grew at a robust pace in February, re- flecting the continued expansion of auto loans and a par- tial rebound in credit card account balances. Banks in the April SLOOS reported easing auto lending standards in the first quarter but generally reported that standards remained tight compared with the end of 2019, espe- cially for nonprime borrowers. Banks also reported that standards on credit cards eased over the first quarter of 2021 but were generally still tighter than before the pan- demic. Interest rates offered to nonprime borrowers continued to rise through February, with the fraction of these offers with zero introductory rates continuing to decline. The staff provided an update on its assessments of the stability of the financial system. The staff noted that cor- porate bond spreads had declined notably since late last year and were at the lower ends of their historical distri- butions. In addition, measures of the equity risk pre- mium declined further, and nonprice measures, such as high IPO volume, also indicated elevated investor appe- tite for risk in the equity market. Valuation pressures for CRE remained high, although information related to CRE continued to be noisier than usual due to pan- demic-induced declines in transactions. House price growth increased further, with house prices outpacing rents. In contrast, vulnerabilities from both household and business debt had diminished, reflecting continued _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 27–28, 2021Page 7 government support, a slower pace of business borrow- ing, and improving business earnings, although many households and businesses continued to struggle. Re- garding financial leverage, the staff noted that bank cap- ital ratios remained above pre-pandemic levels in the fourth quarter, but risks remained. Leverage among hedge funds was elevated and increased in the third quarter of last year for the most highly leveraged funds. Leverage in hedge funds’ prime brokerage accounts rose notably through the fourth quarter of last year, reflecting elevated hedge fund leverage related to their stock mar- ket activities. The staff highlighted recent episodes un- derlining the opacity of risk exposures among some lev- eraged entities. With regard to funding risks, the staff noted that MMFs and open-end mutual funds faced sig- nificant structural vulnerabilities associated with liquidity transformation. Assets under management at MMFs de- clined during the second half of 2020, while open-end mutual fund holdings of corporate bonds rose during the second half of last year. Staff Economic Outlook The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the April FOMC meeting was slightly stronger than the March forecast. Real GDP growth was projected to post a substantial increase this year, with a correspondingly rapid decline in the unemployment rate, as further re- ductions in social distancing and favorable financial con- ditions were expected to support output growth. With the boost to growth from continued reductions in social distancing assumed to fade after 2021, GDP growth was expected to step down in 2022 and 2023. However, with monetary policy assumed to remain highly accommoda- tive, the staff continued to anticipate that real GDP growth would outpace that of potential over much of this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels. The staff’s outlook for inflation was broadly unchanged. The 12-month changes in total and core PCE prices were expected to move above 2 percent in coming months as the unusually low readings from the spring of 2020 dropped out of the calculation window and as a recent jump in consumer energy prices pushed up the total measure. Core inflation was expected to ease some later in the year but to remain above 2 percent at the end of 2021, boosted by large increases in import prices, a recovery in prices that had been especially affected by the pandemic, and the temporary effects of supply bot- tlenecks. Inflation was then projected to dip slightly be- low 2 percent in 2022 as the influence of these transitory factors diminished, before returning to 2 percent by the end of 2023, supported by sustained tight levels of re- source utilization in labor and product markets. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside and that the uncertainty around the forecast was elevated. In particular, despite the demonstrated re- silience of the economy to surges in the pandemic over the past year, the possibility that COVID-19 variants that were more contagious or more resistant to existing vaccines would spread posed a salient downside risk. The staff continued to view the risks around the inflation projection as balanced. On the upside, bottlenecks, sup- ply disruptions, and historically high rates of resource utilization were seen as potential sources of greater-than- expected inflationary pressures. Alternatively, the possi- bility that inflation would be held down by low underly- ing trend inflation and a weaker-than-expected response to resource utilization was seen as an important down- side risk. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tre- mendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Amid progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had strengthened. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic re- mained weak but had shown improvement. Inflation had risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. Overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Participants noted that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. The ongoing public health cri- sis continued to weigh on the economy, and risks to the economic outlook remained. Participants observed that economic activity had picked up sharply this year, with robust gains in consumer spending, housing-sector activity, business equipment investment, and manufacturing production. They noted that the acceleration in economic activity reflected posi- tive developments associated with the rapid pace of vac- cinations as well as continued support from fiscal and monetary policies. Nevertheless, participants generally noted that the economy remained far from the Commit- tee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. In their discussion of the household sector, participants remarked that indicators of consumer spending surged Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ in March and expected that further gains in spending would contribute significantly to the economic recovery. Many participants commented that fiscal stimulus, ac- commodative financial conditions, the release of pent- up demand, progress on widespread vaccination, and the ongoing reduction of social-distancing measures were important factors supporting spending. Many partici- pants also noted that consumer spending would con- tinue to be bolstered by these factors as well as by the elevated level of accumulated household savings. Sev- eral participants observed that housing market activity continued to be strong, supported in part by low interest rates. With respect to the business sector, participants noted that business equipment investment continued to rise at a robust pace and manufacturing activity was expanding at a strong clip. That said, many participants discussed reports of shortages of materials and labor as well as sup- ply chain bottlenecks as likely restraints to the pace of recovery in manufacturing and other business sectors. Many participants also noted that their District contacts had reported a pickup in activity in the leisure, travel, and hospitality sectors. Those contacts had grown increas- ingly optimistic about overall business conditions, given ongoing progress on vaccinations, easing of restrictions on in-person activities, and substantial fiscal support. A couple of participants reported improved conditions in the agricultural sector, with farmers’ income supported by higher crop prices and federal aid payments. Participants commented on the continued improvement in labor market conditions in recent months. Job gains in the March employment report were strong, and the unemployment rate fell to 6.0 percent. Even so, partic- ipants judged that the economy was far from achieving the Committee’s broad-based and inclusive maximum- employment goal. Payroll employment was 8.4 million jobs below its pre-pandemic level. Some participants noted that the labor market recovery continued to be un- even across demographic and income groups and across sectors. Many participants also remarked that business contacts in their Districts reported having trouble hiring workers, likely reflecting factors such as early retire- ments, health concerns, childcare responsibilities, and expanded unemployment insurance benefits. Many par- ticipants noted as well that these factors were depressing the labor force participation rate, relative to its pre-pan- demic level. Some of these factors were seen as likely to remain significant while pandemic-related risks per- sisted. Based on reports from business contacts, some participants noted that the step-up in demand for labor had started to put some upward pressure on wages. Moreover, over the medium term, participants expected labor market conditions to continue to improve, sup- ported by accommodative fiscal and monetary policies as well as continued progress on vaccinations, unwind- ing of social distancing, and the associated recovery in economic activity. A couple of participants remarked that businesses in industries severely affected by the pan- demic were downsizing or that some businesses were fo- cused on cutting costs or increasing productivity, partic- ularly through automation. In their comments about inflation, participants antici- pated that inflation as measured by the 12-month change of the PCE price index would move above 2 percent in the near term as very low readings from early in the pan- demic fall out of the calculation. In addition, increases in oil prices were expected to pass through to consumer energy prices. Participants also noted that the expected surge in demand as the economy reopens further, along with some transitory supply chain bottlenecks, would contribute to PCE price inflation temporarily running somewhat above 2 percent. After the transitory effects of these factors fade, participants generally expected measured inflation to ease. Looking further ahead, par- ticipants expected inflation to be at levels consistent with achieving the Committee’s objectives over time. A num- ber of participants remarked that supply chain bottle- necks and input shortages may not be resolved quickly and, if so, these factors could put upward pressure on prices beyond this year. They noted that in some indus- tries, supply chain disruptions appeared to be more per- sistent than originally anticipated and reportedly had led to higher input costs. Despite the expected short-run fluctuations in measured inflation, many participants commented that various measures of longer-term infla- tion expectations remained well anchored at levels broadly consistent with achieving the Committee’s longer-run goals. Participants judged that uncertainty was elevated and that the outlook was highly dependent on the course of the virus. Amid considerable progress on vaccinations, the unwinding of social distancing, and strong policy support, participants assessed that risks to the outlook were no longer as elevated as in previous months. Nev- ertheless, some participants remarked that the pandemic continued to pose downside risks to the economic out- look and noted the potential for an uneven recovery in light of new virus strains and potential hesitancy regard- ing vaccination. As upside risks, some participants men- tioned that the release of pent-up demand, accumulated excess household savings, and rapid progress on vac- cinations, amid continued fiscal and monetary support, _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 27–28, 2021Page 9 could boost economic activity and bring individuals back into the labor force more quickly than currently ex- pected. Some participants mentioned upside risks around the inflation outlook that could arise if tempo- rary factors influencing inflation turned out to be more persistent than expected. Participants who commented on financial stability agreed that the financial sector had shown resilience dur- ing the pandemic, in large part reflecting strong policy support. Some remarked that the capital positions and loan loss reserves at large banks remained high, and earnings were strong. A few participants noted that vul- nerabilities from both business and household debt were at a moderate level. Nevertheless, a couple of partici- pants highlighted that forbearance programs instituted in response to the pandemic could be masking vulnera- bilities among households and businesses. Regarding as- set valuations, several participants noted that risk appe- tite in capital markets was elevated, as equity valuations had risen further, IPO activity remained high, and risk spreads on corporate bonds were at the bottom of their historical distribution. A couple of participants re- marked that, should investor risk appetite fall, an associ- ated drop in asset prices coupled with high business and financial leverage could have adverse implications for the real economy. A number of participants commented on valuation pressures being somewhat elevated in the housing market. Some participants mentioned the po- tential risks to the financial system stemming from the activities of hedge funds and other leveraged investors, commenting on the limited visibility into the activities of these entities or on the prudential risk-management practices of dealers’ prime-brokerage businesses. Some participants highlighted potential vulnerabilities in other parts of the financial system, including run-prone invest- ment funds in short-term funding and credit markets. Various participants commented on the prolonged pe- riod of low interest rates and highly accommodative fi- nancial market conditions and the possibility for these conditions to lead to reach-for-yield behavior that could raise financial stability risks. In their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the Federal Reserve’s commit- ment to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy during this challenging time, thereby promot- ing the Committee’s statutory goals of maximum em- ployment and price stability. Participants agreed that the economy was still far from the Committee’s longer-run goals. Moreover, the path ahead continued to depend on the course of the virus, and risks to the economic outlook remained. Consequently, participants judged that the current stance of policy and policy guidance re- mained appropriate to foster further economic recovery as well as to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations that continue to be well anchored at 2 percent. Participants judged that the Committee’s current guid- ance for the federal funds rate and asset purchases was serving the economy well. Participants also noted that the existing outcome-based guidance implied that the path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet would depend on actual progress toward reaching the Committee’s maximum-employment and inflation goals. In particular, some participants emphasized that an im- portant feature of the outcome-based guidance was that policy would be set based on observed progress toward the Committee’s goals, not on uncertain economic fore- casts. However, a couple of participants commented on the risks of inflation pressures building up to unwelcome levels before they become sufficiently evident to induce a policy reaction. In their discussion of the Federal Reserve’s asset pur- chases, various participants noted that it would likely be some time until the economy had made substantial fur- ther progress toward the Committee’s maximum-em- ployment and price-stability goals relative to the condi- tions prevailing in December 2020 when the Committee first provided its guidance for asset purchases. Con- sistent with the Committee’s outcome-based guidance, purchases would continue at least at the current pace un- til that time. Many participants highlighted the im- portance of the Committee clearly communicating its as- sessment of progress toward its longer-run goals well in advance of the time when it could be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of asset pur- chases. The timing of such communications would de- pend on the evolution of the economy and the pace of progress toward the Committee’s goals. A number of participants suggested that if the economy continued to make rapid progress toward the Committee’s goals, it might be appropriate at some point in upcoming meet- ings to begin discussing a plan for adjusting the pace of asset purchases. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the COVID-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. They noted that amid progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and em- ployment had strengthened. Although the sectors most Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ adversely affected by the pandemic remained weak, they had shown improvement. Inflation had risen, largely re- flecting transitory factors. Overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Members also re- marked that the path of the economy would depend sig- nificantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. In addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis continued to weigh on the economy and risks to the economic outlook remained. Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was commit- ted to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. All members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the Com- mittee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and in- flation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expecta- tions remain well anchored at 2 percent. Members ex- pected to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until those outcomes were achieved. All members agreed to keep the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range un- til labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employ- ment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, members agreed that it would be appropriate for the Federal Reserve to continue to increase its hold- ings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress had been made toward the Committee’s maximum-em- ployment and price-stability goals. They judged that these asset purchases would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Members also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. Members agreed that the postmeeting statement should acknowledge that indicators of economic activity and employment had strengthened but that, despite showing improvement, the sectors of the economy most affected by the pandemic remained weak. Members also judged that, while risks to the outlook remained, continued pro- gress on vaccinations and accommodative monetary and fiscal policies most likely would underpin further gains in economic activity and employment and would limit risks to the outlook. As a result, they agreed to remove the characterization of risks as “considerable” in the FOMC statement. With regard to the characterization of inflation, members agreed that the statement should note that inflation had risen but that the increase largely reflected transitory factors. They noted that inflation as measured by the 12-month change of the PCE price in- dex was expected to move above 2 percent as the very low readings from early in the pandemic fell out of the calculation and as past increases in oil prices passed through to consumer energy prices. The expected re- bound in spending as the economy continued to reopen was also likely to boost inflation temporarily, particularly if supply bottlenecks limited how quickly production could respond to demand in the near term. However, members also viewed these increases in prices as likely to have only transitory effects on inflation. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective April 29, 2021, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to:  Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent.  Increase the System Open Market Ac- count holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mort- gage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 bil- lion per month.  Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by additional amounts _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 27–28, 2021Page 11 and purchase agency commercial mort- gage-backed securities (CMBS) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities.  Conduct repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar funding markets.  Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $80 billion per day; the per-coun- terparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS.  Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. The COVID-19 pandemic is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world. Amid pro- gress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employ- ment have strengthened. The sectors most ad- versely affected by the pandemic remain weak but have shown improvement. Inflation has risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. Over- all financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. house- holds and businesses. The path of the economy will depend signifi- cantly on the course of the virus, including pro- gress on vaccinations. The ongoing public health crisis continues to weigh on the econ- omy, and risks to the economic outlook remain. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running per- sistently below this longer-run goal, the Com- mittee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer‑term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Com- mittee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and in- flation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, the Federal Reserve will continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mort- gage‑backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the Committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. These as- set purchases help foster smooth market func- tioning and accommodative financial condi- tions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Michelle Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, Randal K. Quarles, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. The Board of Governors also voted unan- imously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective April 29, 2021. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 15– 16, 2021. The meeting adjourned at 10:20 a.m. on April 28, 2021. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on April 6, 2021, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on March 16–17, 2021. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of April 27–28, 2021Page 13 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee June 15–16, 2021 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was held by videoconfer- ence on Tuesday, June 15, 2021, at 9:00 a.m. and contin- ued on Wednesday, June 16, 2021, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Mary C. Daly Charles L. Evans Randal K. Quarles Christopher J. Waller James Bullard, Esther L. George, Naureen Hassan, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Wendy E. Dunn, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, Chiara Scotti, and Nitish R. Sinha, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Carol C. Bertaut, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Marnie Gillis DeBoer and David López-Salido, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Elizabeth Klee, Senior Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors; David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Shaghil Ahmed, Kartik B. Athreya, Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Brett Berger, 2 Senior Adviser, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Ellen E. Meade and Edward Nelson, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Andrew Figura, Associate Director, Division of Account Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Christopher J. Gust, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Randall A. Williams, Lead Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Stephanie E. Curcuru2 and Andrea Raffo, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; Laura Lipscomb,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Steve Spurry,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Jennifer Gallagher, Special Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Governors Brian J. Bonis, Etienne Gagnon, and Dan Li, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Charles Fleischman, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors Alyssa Arute,2 Manager, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of Governors Courtney Demartini,2 Lead Financial Institution Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Anthony M. Diercks, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Joseph W. Gruber and Ellis W. Tallman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Cleveland, respectively Anne Baum, Carlos Garriga, Susan McLaughlin,2 Anna Nordstrom,2 Giovanni Olivei, Paolo A. Pesenti, Julie Ann Remache,2 Robert G. Valletta, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, St. Louis, New York, New York, Boston, New York, New York, San Francisco, and Minneapolis, respectively Roc Armenter, Jennifer S. Crystal,2 Jonas Fisher, and Matthew Nemeth,2 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, Chicago, and New York, respectively Jason A. Miu,2 Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Karel Mertens, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Sriya Anbil,2 Group Manager, Division of Monetary Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Affairs, Board of Governors Mark A. Carlson,2 Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors David M. Byrne, Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Michele Cavallo, Bernd Schlusche, Mary Tian, and Francisco Vazquez-Grande, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Alberto Queralto, Principal Economist, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors 3 Attended through the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. Kristopher Gerardi, Financial Economist and Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Haitham Jendoubi,2 Policy and Markets Analysis Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Discussion of Repurchase Agreement Arrange- ments Participants resumed their discussion from the April 2021 FOMC meeting of considerations related to the es- tablishment of a domestic standing repurchase agree- ment (repo) facility (SRF) and a standing Foreign Inter- national Monetary Authorities (FIMA) repo facility. Building on discussion at previous meetings, the staff presented considerations for how these facilities might be designed. The design considerations were guided by Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ participants’ general desire to have these facilities play a backstop role in fostering effective implementation of monetary policy and supporting smooth functioning of markets. In April, participants highlighted the im- portance of designing these facilities in a way that would leave ample room for private market activity while min- imizing the potential for stigma, promote equitable ac- cess to an appropriately broad set of counterparties, and be governed by the FOMC. With these principles and goals in mind, the staff presented potential terms for each facility. The staff presentation on the potential design of a do- mestic SRF included establishing the minimum bid rate at 25 basis points—the top of the target range for the federal funds rate. The staff briefing suggested counter- parties for the facility would include primary dealers and would be extended over time to include banks that ex- pressed interest in participation. The staff presentation noted that such a facility could be limited to only U.S. Treasury securities or could accept all securities currently accepted in open market operations (OMOs), which in- clude Treasury securities, agency securities, and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). The briefing noted that, on the one hand, restricting eligible collateral for a domestic SRF to U.S. Treasury securities could mitigate concerns that an SRF could encourage counterparties to take on greater liquidity risk. On the other hand, accept- ing agency securities and agency MBS in an SRF would be consistent with the structure of current repo opera- tions and could help address a greater range of potential repo market pressures from spilling over into the federal funds market. The proposed design for a standing FIMA repo facility was similar in structure to the existing temporary FIMA repo facility. Under the draft terms, the range of eligible counterparties for the FIMA repo facility would con- tinue to include foreign official institutions, largely com- prising central banks, subject to individual approval. The eligible collateral would continue to be limited to U.S. Treasury securities. The draft terms envisioned that the rate for the FIMA repo facility would be set equal to the top of the target range for the federal funds rate, a rate equal to the minimum bid rate in the draft terms for the domestic SRF. In their discussion of considerations related to the de- sign of a domestic SRF, a substantial majority restated their view, conveyed at the April 2021 meeting, that the potential benefits of such a facility outweighed the po- tential costs. Participants broadly supported the terms presented by the staff for such a facility. Several partic- ipants noted the importance of setting the minimum bid rate high enough so that the facility was positioned as a backstop, while some pointed out the importance of not setting the rate so high that usage of the facility could be stigmatized or that the facility would not sufficiently contain pressures that could spill over into the federal funds market. Several participants noted that setting an SRF rate at the top of the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with addressing pressures that could spill over to the federal funds market. Others remarked that setting the SRF rate at the same level as the primary credit rate for borrowing at the discount window would promote equitable access to Federal Re- serve liquidity across banks and counterparties for OMOs. Several participants commented that it may also be appropriate to adjust the SRF rate over time based on accumulated experience and economic or financial de- velopments. Several participants suggested that, in order to ensure an SRF continues to be effective, it may be appropriate to study the costs and benefits of additional adjustments over time, such as moving to a cleared set- tlement structure. Most participants noted the benefits of allowing banks to be counterparties to a domestic SRF, including more directly addressing liquidity pres- sures for participants in the federal funds market and promoting equitable access to liquidity across domestic counterparties. Many participants judged that it would be appropriate to accept the same set of securities that is currently accepted for OMOs. Some participants indi- cated that accepting these securities in the domestic SRF’s operations should increase the effectiveness of the facility in limiting upward pressures in repo markets that could spill over into the federal funds market. Some other participants noted that limiting acceptable securi- ties for SRF operations to U.S. Treasury securities could have benefits, including consistency with the regulatory distinction between U.S. Treasury securities and other types of securities, potentially limiting the Federal Re- serve’s footprint in financial markets, and maintaining consistency with the structure of the proposed FIMA repo facility and the overnight reverse repo (ON RRP) facility. Several participants cautioned that establishing a backstop SRF would not diminish the importance of providing a sufficiently ample supply of reserves on an ongoing basis or the need to improve the structural re- siliency of the U.S. Treasury market. A couple of partic- ipants reiterated their concerns about converting current ongoing daily repo operations to a standing facility and suggested ways to calibrate the terms of the facility to mitigate these concerns, including setting a relatively Minutes of the Meeting of June 15–16, 2021Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ high minimum bid rate or limiting securities eligible for SRF operations to only U.S. Treasury securities. In their discussion of considerations related to the de- sign of a standing FIMA repo facility, a substantial ma- jority supported the broad structure discussed in the staff presentation. Many participants generally saw ben- efits in keeping the rate at the same level as that in the potential domestic SRF in light of the similar nature of the transactions and high quality of the collateral. A number of participants remarked that the rate at the FIMA repo facility could be set at a higher level than at the domestic SRF or could be set at a level comparable to that in the Federal Reserve’s dollar liquidity swap lines. A couple of participants commented on the po- tential reputational risks of establishing a standing FIMA repo facility, including those associated with providing liquidity on a standing basis to a wider set of central banks and finance ministries than through existing swap lines. These participants reiterated the importance of maintaining well-defined criteria for participation in the facility and suggested that the FOMC should receive reg- ular reports on the operations and counterparties ap- proved for a standing FIMA repo facility. Participants agreed that they would continue their dis- cussion of design parameters for both a domestic SRF and a standing FIMA repo facility. The Chair asked the staff to work on a specific proposal that reflected the views expressed by participants at this meeting. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments over the intermeeting period. On net, U.S. financial conditions eased further, led by a de- cline in Treasury yields. Lower term premiums appeared to be a significant component of the declines, as re- flected by lower implied volatility on longer-term inter- est rates. Equities rose slightly, the broad dollar weak- ened, and credit spreads were little changed at histori- cally tight levels. Over the period, market participants focused on data showing lower employment growth and higher inflation readings than had been expected. The median 2021 core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation forecast from the Open Market Desk’s Survey of Pri- mary Dealers jumped nearly 1 percentage point from the previous survey. However, median forecasts for 2022 and 2023 each rose less than 0.1 percent, suggesting ex- pectations for inflationary pressures to subside. Infla- tion compensation as measured by five-year breakeven rates on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities peaked in mid-May at the highest level in more than a decade, but the increase was driven almost entirely by higher in- flation compensation at short horizons. Indeed, one- year-forward inflation compensation at horizons beyond a year was relatively stable. Measures of expectations for Federal Reserve policy were little changed over the period. The median re- spondent to the Desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants continued to expect the pace of Fed- eral Reserve asset purchases to begin to decline in the first quarter of 2022, although most respondents also saw a reasonable chance that this decline could occur one quarter earlier or later. The median respondent ex- pected purchases to end in the fourth quarter of 2022. The Desk’s survey measures of the expected path of the target federal funds rate were also fairly steady, and the median respondent continued to expect the first target rate increase to occur in the third quarter of 2023. Nearly all Desk survey respondents anticipated that the Summary of Economic Projections would show the me- dian Committee participant projecting either no increase in the target range or one ¼ percentage point increase by the end of 2023. The manager noted that downward pressure on money market rates continued over the period. Banks contin- ued to limit growth in their balance sheets by allowing wholesale liabilities to mature and encouraging custom- ers to shift some nonoperational deposits to money mar- ket funds. Moreover, the supply of Treasury bills, a pri- mary investment for government money market mutual funds, fell further. Against this backdrop, the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) printed at 1 basis point each day in the intermeeting period, while the ef- fective federal funds rate (EFFR) decreased 1 basis point, to 6 basis points. Amid heightened demand and reduced supply for short- term investments, the ON RRP continued to maintain a floor on overnight rates. Growth in the ON RRP and other nonreserve liabilities helped expand the base of Federal Reserve liabilities supporting asset purchases, damping the increase in reserves and easing pressure on bank balance sheets. Over the next intermeeting period, the manager antici- pated that further increases in reserves and reductions in bill supply could put additional downward pressure on overnight rates. A modest technical adjustment to ad- ministered rates could be warranted to maintain the EFFR well within the target range and support smooth functioning of short-term funding markets. Such an ad- justment would be expected to raise the federal funds Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ rate and to lift other overnight rates modestly. Most re- spondents to the Desk’s surveys expected an adminis- tered rate adjustment this summer. The manager noted that balances at the ON RRP facility would likely con- tinue to grow over coming months. The staff would continue to monitor developments, and the manager noted that, at some point, it could become appropriate to consider raising the counterparty limits for the ON RRP. The manager provided an update on progress toward winding down a number of emergency facilities estab- lished under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. While market participants took note of the Federal Re- serve Board’s announcement on winding down the Sec- ondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF) hold- ings, it elicited little price response. The commencement of exchange-traded funds sales proceeded smoothly. All of the SMCCF assets are expected to be sold by the end of this year. Finally, the manager noted a proposal to request the Chair’s approval for an extension to the temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements to December 31, 2021. The extension would benefit the U.S. economy by helping forestall potential pressures in offshore dollar funding markets that could spill over to U.S. financial conditions while much of the global economy remains on an uncertain recovery path from the pandemic. Should the Committee decide to make the FIMA repo facility standing, an extension would also provide suffi- cient time for those temporary swap line central banks that are not currently enrolled in the FIMA repo facility to do so and to become fully operational. Secretary’s note: The Chair subsequently pro- vided approval to the Desk, following the pro- cedures in the Authorization for Foreign Cur- rency Operations, to extend the expiration of the temporary U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines through December 31, 2021. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the June 15–16 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) was expanding in the second quarter at a pace that was faster than in the first quarter of the year. More- over, labor market conditions had improved further in April and May. Consumer price inflation through April—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the PCE price index—had picked up notably, largely reflecting transitory factors. Total nonfarm payroll employment increased solidly over April and May, though at a slower monthly pace than over February and March. As of May, total payroll employment had retraced two-thirds of the job losses seen at the onset of the pandemic, although employment in the leisure and hospitality sector and in the education sector (including both public and private education) had bounced back by less. Over April and May, the unem- ployment rate edged down and stood at 5.8 percent in May. The unemployment rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics also moved down, although the rates for African Americans and Hispanics remained well above the national average. Both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ra- tio moved up slightly, and both measures had recovered only partially from their lows during the pandemic. Ini- tial claims for regular state unemployment insurance benefits had moved down further since mid-April and were at the lowest level since the beginning of the pan- demic, though they remained high relative to their pre- pandemic level. Weekly estimates of private-sector pay- rolls constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff using data provided by the payroll processor ADP, which were available through May, suggested that the pace of private employment gains had stepped up late in that month. The pace of increases in several measures of labor com- pensation had moved up in recent months. Average hourly earnings for all employees jumped at a sizable monthly rate in April and May, even though the large job gains in the leisure and hospitality sector—where wages tend to be lower than in other sectors—likely held down the increases in average hourly earnings in these months. A staff measure of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the ADP data had stepped up signif- icantly in April relative to March. The employment cost index of total hourly compensation in the private sector increased at an annual rate of 4 percent in the three months ending in March, a notably faster pace than over the previous three months. Recent 12-month change measures of inflation, using ei- ther PCE prices or the consumer price index (CPI), were boosted significantly by the base effects of the drop in prices from the spring of 2020 rolling out of the calcula- tion. In addition, a surge in demand as the economy re- opened further, combined with production bottlenecks and supply constraints, contributed to the large recent Minutes of the Meeting of June 15–16, 2021Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ monthly price increases. Total PCE price inflation was 3.6 percent over the 12 months ending in April. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in con- sumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending in April. In contrast, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 1.8 percent in April. In May, the 12-month change in the CPI was 5 percent, while core CPI infla- tion was 3.8 percent over the same period. In the second quarter, the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, had returned to the level that prevailed in 2014, a time when inflation was modest. Real PCE increased substantially in March and then was little changed from that high level in April. The compo- nents of the nominal retail sales data that are used to es- timate PCE edged down in May, but the sales data for the previous two months were revised up markedly, pointing to stronger real PCE growth than had been in- itially estimated. Combined with reduced social distanc- ing and more widespread vaccinations, key factors that influence consumer spending—including increasing job gains, the upward trend in real disposable income, high levels of household net worth, and low interest rates— pointed to strong real PCE growth over the rest of the year. Housing demand continued to be robust, with construc- tion of single-family homes and home sales remaining well above their pre-pandemic levels and house prices rising appreciably further. The incoming data for this sector indicated that residential investment spending was being temporarily held back in the second quarter by ma- terials shortages and limited stocks of homes for sale. Available indicators suggested that equipment and intan- gibles investment—particularly in high-tech catego- ries—was increasing solidly in the second quarter. Ris- ing orders for nondefense capital goods excluding air- craft were running well above the increases in shipments of those goods through April, which pointed to addi- tional gains in business equipment spending in coming months. Moreover, business investment in the drilling and mining sector appeared to be increasing further, as crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of drilling investment—continued to rise through early June, with oil prices moving higher. However, nominal nonresidential construction spending declined further in April, and investment in nonresidential structures out- side of the drilling and mining sector looked to remain weak in the current quarter, likely reflecting continued hesitation by businesses to commit to building projects with lengthy times to completion and uncertain future returns. Manufacturing output expanded solidly, on balance, over April and May. Output in the motor vehicle and parts sector rose, on net, although semiconductor short- ages were still weighing on vehicle production. Factory output outside of the motor vehicle sector increased sol- idly, and production in the mining sector, which includes crude oil and natural gas extraction, also increased over April and May. Total real government purchases looked to be about flat, on balance, in the second quarter. Data through May indicated that real federal defense spending was rising only slightly, and nondefense spending was expected to drop following a first-quarter surge in pandemic-related expenditures. State and local government purchases looked to be increasing significantly, as the payrolls of these governments expanded solidly over April and May. Nominal state and local construction spending, how- ever, edged down in April. With the strong economic recovery leading to an improved outlook for state and local tax revenues, and the additional federal support for these governments included in the American Rescue Plan, state and local purchases appeared likely to in- crease notably over the rest of the year. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened to a record size in March and then reversed that widening in April. Real goods exports in March surpassed their January 2020 levels for the first time and then continued to grow in April, with particular strength in exports of capital goods. Real goods imports surged to record-high levels in March and then stepped back modestly in April. Bottlenecks in the global semiconductor industry, which had weighed on exports and imports of automotive products this year, continued to do so through April. Exports and imports of services remained depressed rel- ative to pre-pandemic levels, as international travel in- creased only slightly from February. Recent data pointed to a pickup in foreign economic ac- tivity in the second quarter. Demand improved as social-distancing restrictions were lifted in the United Kingdom and the euro area following the rollout of vac- cines. With the economic reopening under way, pur- chasing managers indexes (PMIs) in both the manufac- turing and services sectors were strong in Europe in April and May. In the emerging market economies (EMEs), manufacturing PMIs and exports were gener- Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ ally robust. However, many EMEs continued to strug- gle to contain the virus amid a slow pace of vaccinations, particularly in South America and parts of Asia. Con- sumer price inflation continued to rise in many foreign economies, primarily driven by rebounding energy prices and the fading effects of steep price declines seen early last year. Price increases were concentrated in rel- atively few items, suggesting that underlying inflationary pressures remained subdued amid considerable eco- nomic slack. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Overall financial conditions eased during the intermeet- ing period as market participants appeared to remain confident that the economic recovery was broadly on track, that inflation over the medium term would stay contained, and that monetary policy would remain ac- commodative. Domestic equity prices edged up, and corporate bond spreads narrowed a little. Yields on nominal Treasury securities declined modestly since the previous FOMC meeting. Measures of inflation com- pensation at shorter horizons moved down somewhat, on net, while measures of longer-term inflation compen- sation were little changed. A straight read of overnight index swap (OIS) quotes suggested that the expected path for the federal funds rate moved lower over the in- termeeting period and that the expected policy rate would remain below 25 basis points until the first quarter of 2023. Short-term funding markets functioned smoothly amid record participation in the ON RRP fa- cility. Financing conditions for businesses and house- holds remained accommodative, particularly for large firms and households with high credit ratings. The Treasury yield curve flattened a bit, on net, with 2-year yields about unchanged while 5-, 10-, and 30-year yields declined somewhat. Inflation compensation de- clined a bit at shorter horizons but held steady at longer horizons. Market expectations for the federal funds rate path over the medium term, as implied by OIS quotes unadjusted for term premiums, declined moderately. Broad stock price indexes increased slightly over the in- termeeting period, with stocks in cyclically sensitive sec- tors generally outperforming. One-month option- implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—reached its lowest level since February 2020 and remained a bit below the middle of its historical distribution. Spreads of yields on corporate bonds over those on comparable- maturity Treasury securities narrowed a little for all credit ratings. Meanwhile, yields on municipal bonds reached historical lows, with spreads roughly unchanged for high-credit-rated bonds and moderately narrower for lower-credit-rated bonds. Short-term funding markets continued to function smoothly over the intermeeting period. Short-term and overnight rates remained near historical lows, with over- night rates dipping slightly. The EFFR was nearly con- stant throughout the period at 6 basis points, while the SOFR remained at 1 basis point. With rates low and net Treasury bill supply contracting, government money market funds, which at the same time were attracting no- table investment options at nonnegative rates. As a result, ON RRP take-up by these funds surged, pushing total ON RRP participation to record levels in late May and June. inflows, had limited International financial market participants were focused on news about inflation and monetary policy communi- cations. In Europe, stronger-than-expected readings for both inflation and economic activity, as well as increased optimism about vaccinations, contributed to a rise in market-based measures of inflation expectations. On net, European longer-term government bond yields were little changed even as U.S. yields declined, and the broad dollar index decreased modestly. In emerging markets, credit spreads narrowed a bit, and capital flows into EME funds continued at a moderate pace. Equity indexes increased somewhat in both emerging and ad- vanced foreign economies. Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms through capital markets remained highly accommodative, as re- flected in historically low corporate bond and leveraged loan yields as well as high price-to-earnings ratios in the equity markets. Gross issuance of corporate bonds and leveraged loans was solid. Equity raised through tradi- tional initial public offerings was robust in April but sof- tened to more moderate levels in May and through mid- June, while the pace of seasoned equity offerings was modest over the intermeeting period. Meanwhile, equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies slowed markedly. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans outstanding at banks fell through mid-May, with forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans continuing to drive balances down and more than offsetting volumes of new loan originations. Tepid de- mand for loans appears to have been a factor in the de- cline in loans outstanding. For instance, despite healthy growth in C&I commitments at large banks over the first quarter, there was no corresponding change in the utili- zation rates of credit lines. The credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations re- mained largely stable over the intermeeting period. The Minutes of the Meeting of June 15–16, 2021Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ volume of credit rating upgrades for nonfinancial bonds and leveraged loans outpaced downgrades somewhat in the April-to-early-June period. There were no reported corporate defaults in April, and defaults were low in May. Delinquency rates on bank C&I loans also re- mained low in the first quarter. Market indicators of fu- ture default expectations were little changed and re- mained low relative to their historical range. In the municipal bond market, financing conditions re- mained accommodative over the intermeeting period. Issuance of municipal bonds was solid in recent months, and indicators of the credit quality of municipal debt showed some signs of improvement, with the volume of bond upgrades outpacing the volume of bond down- grades. Financing conditions for small businesses were little changed, with supply of small business loans remaining tight and demand still subdued outside of the PPP. While small business loan originations rose in April, sur- passing pre-pandemic levels, loans made under the PPP likely accounted for a significant portion of that growth. Loan performance and other indicators of the financial health of small businesses improved in recent months. However, in certain sectors, such as accommodation and food services, small businesses remained stressed. For commercial real estate (CRE) financed through cap- ital markets, financing conditions remained mostly ac- commodative over the intermeeting period. Issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) was solid in recent months except in the retail and hotel sec- tors. Spreads of agency CMBS narrowed to below pre- pandemic levels. Meanwhile, spreads on non-agency triple-A CMBS were little changed at accommodative levels, while non-agency triple-B spreads remained ele- vated. CRE loan growth at banks continued to be weak through mid-May, likely reflecting weak demand as well as tight underwriting standards. In the residential mortgage market, financing conditions were little changed over the intermeeting period and re- mained accommodative for stronger borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. Credit continued to appear tight for borrowers with lower credit scores. Mortgage rates for most borrowers were little changed, on net, and remained near historical lows. Home-pur- chase and refinance mortgage activity continued at a strong pace through early June. The share of mortgages in forbearance declined in May. Financing conditions for consumer credit remained gen- erally accommodative. Consumer loans grew at a robust pace in April, driven by rapid growth in auto loan bal- ances. Credit card balances on banks’ books rose in May, reversing an April decline. For subprime borrow- ers, conditions in the credit card market appeared to have eased somewhat further from the tight conditions seen after the onset of the pandemic. Conditions in the asset-backed securities market continued to be support- ive of lending during the intermeeting period. Staff Economic Outlook The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for the June FOMC meeting was stronger than the April forecast. Real GDP growth was projected to increase substantially this year, with a correspondingly rapid de- cline in the unemployment rate. Further reductions in social distancing and favorable financial conditions were expected to support output growth, even though the ef- fects of fiscal stimulus on economic growth were start- ing to unwind. With the boost to growth from contin- ued reductions in social distancing assumed to fade after 2021 and the further unwinding of fiscal stimulus, GDP growth was expected to step down in 2022 and 2023. Nevertheless, with monetary policy assumed to remain highly accommodative, the staff continued to anticipate that real GDP growth would outpace that of potential over most of this period, leading to a decline in the un- employment rate to historically low levels. The staff’s near-term outlook for inflation was revised up markedly, but the staff continued to expect the rise in inflation this year to be transitory. The 12-month change in total and core PCE prices had moved well above 2 percent in April, and incoming CPI data sug- gested that PCE price inflation would remain high in May. The recent 12-month measures of inflation were being boosted significantly by the base effects of the drop in prices from the spring of 2020 rolling out of the calculation. In addition, the surge in demand as the economy reopened further, combined with production bottlenecks and supply constraints, contributed to the large recent monthly price increases. The staff expected the 12-month change in PCE prices to gradually move down in coming months, reflecting, importantly, the fading of base effects along with smaller expected monthly price increases, but PCE price inflation was forecast to still be well above 2 percent at the end of this year. Over the next year, the transitory price increases caused by bottlenecks and supply constraints were ex- pected to largely reverse, and the growth in demand was forecast to ease. As a result, inflation was projected to slow to slightly below 2 percent in 2022 before moving back up to a bit above 2 percent in 2023, supported by high levels of resource utilization. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ The staff continued to see the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook as elevated, although increasingly widespread vaccinations, along with ongoing policy sup- port, were viewed as helping to diminish some of these uncertainties. Nevertheless, the staff judged that the risks around their strong baseline projection for eco- nomic activity were still tilted somewhat to the down- side, as adverse alternative courses of the pandemic— including the possibility of the spread of more-conta- gious, more-vaccine-resistant COVID-19 variants— seemed more likely than outcomes that would be more favorable than in the baseline forecast. The staff contin- ued to view the risks around the inflation projection as roughly balanced. On the upside, bottlenecks, supply disruptions, and historically high rates of resource utili- zation were seen as potential sources of greater-than- expected inflationary pressures, particularly if there were a significant rise in inflation expectations that altered in- flation dynamics. On the downside, if the effects of sup- ply constraints proved to be transitory, as expected, then the inflation record from the past 25 years suggested the possibility that low underlying trend inflation and a flat Phillips curve could cause inflation to revert to relatively low levels despite a strengthening economy. Participants’ Views on Current Economic Condi- tions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2021 through 2023 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of ap- propriate monetary policy, including the path of the fed- eral funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, un- der appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Eco- nomic Projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. In their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that progress on vaccinations had reduced the spread of COVID-19 in the United States. Amid this progress and strong policy support, indicators of eco- nomic activity and employment had strengthened. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic re- mained weak but had shown improvement. Inflation had risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. Overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Participants generally noted that the path of the econ- omy would depend significantly on the course of the vi- rus. Progress on vaccinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the econ- omy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. Participants observed that economic activity was ex- panding at a historically rapid pace, led by robust gains in consumer spending. A vast majority of participants revised up their projections for real GDP growth this year compared with the projections they had submitted in March, citing stronger consumer demand and im- provements in vaccination rates as the primary reasons for these upgrades. That said, participants generally saw supply disruptions and labor shortages as constraining the expansion of economic activity this year. Partici- pants’ projections of real GDP growth in 2022 and 2023 were generally little changed. In their discussion of the household sector, participants remarked that indicators of consumer spending had con- tinued to surge and expected that further gains in spend- ing would contribute significantly to the economic re- covery. Many participants commented that accommo- dative financial conditions, the release of pent-up de- mand, progress on widespread vaccination, the ongoing reduction of social-distancing measures, and fiscal stim- ulus were important factors supporting spending. Some participants also noted that consumer spending would likely continue to be bolstered by the ongoing effects from these factors as well as by households’ elevated level of accumulated savings and generally healthy bal- ance sheets. A majority of participants observed that housing market activity remained strong. With respect to the business sector, most participants noted that activity in the service industries most ad- versely affected by the pandemic, such as in the leisure and hospitality sector, was rebounding as the economy reopened. A number of participants noted that business equipment investment was rising at a strong pace, but growth in manufacturing activity was being restrained by production bottlenecks and supply constraints. In addi- tion, participants reported hearing from contacts in a broad range of industries that shortages of materials and labor as well as supply chain challenges were limiting the ability of firms to keep up with demand. Some business contacts indicated that they were responding to input shortages and bottlenecks by canceling shifts, raising compensation to attract and retain workers, raising prices, or focusing on cutting costs and increasing productivity, particularly through automation. Minutes of the Meeting of June 15–16, 2021Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Participants commented on the continued improvement in labor market conditions in recent months. Job gains in April and May averaged more than 400,000, and the unemployment rate edged down, on net, to 5.8 percent over the period. Many participants pointed to the ele- vated number of job openings and high rates of job switching as further evidence of the improvement in la- bor market conditions. Many participants remarked, however, that the economy was still far from achieving the Committee’s broad-based and inclusive maximum- employment goal, and some participants indicated that recent job gains, while strong, were weaker than they had expected. A number of participants noted that the labor market recovery continued to be uneven across demo- graphic and income groups and across sectors. Participants noted that their District contacts had re- ported having trouble hiring workers to meet demand, likely reflecting factors such as early retirements, con- cerns about the virus, childcare responsibilities, and ex- panded unemployment insurance benefits. Some partic- ipants remarked that these factors were making people either less able or less inclined to work in the current environment. Citing recent wage data and reports from business contacts, many participants judged that labor shortages were putting upward pressure on wages or leading employers to provide additional financial incen- tives to attract and retain workers, particularly in lower- wage occupations. Participants expected labor market conditions to continue to improve, with labor shortages expected to ease throughout the summer and into the fall as progress on vaccinations continues, social distanc- ing unwinds further, more schools reopen, and ex- panded unemployment insurance benefits expire. In their discussions on inflation, participants stated that they had expected inflation to move above 2 percent in the near term, in part as the drop in prices from early in the pandemic fell out of the calculation and past in- creases in oil prices passed through to consumer energy prices. However, participants remarked that the actual rise in inflation was larger than anticipated, with the 12-month change in the PCE price index reaching 3.6 percent in April. Participants attributed the upside surprise to more widespread supply constraints in prod- uct and labor markets than they had anticipated and to a larger-than-expected surge in consumer demand as the economy reopened. They noted that many of their Dis- trict contacts had reported that higher input costs were putting upward pressure on prices. Most participants observed that the largest contributors to the rise in meas- ured inflation were sectors affected by supply bottle- necks or sectors where price levels were rebounding from levels depressed by the pandemic. Looking ahead, participants generally expected inflation to ease as the effect of these transitory factors dissipated, but several participants remarked that they anticipated that supply chain limitations and input shortages would put upward pressure on prices into next year. Several participants noted that, during the early months of the reopening, uncertainty remained too high to accurately assess how long inflation pressures will be sustained. Some partici- pants commented that recent readings of inflation measures that exclude volatile components, such as trimmed mean measures, had been relatively stable at or just below 2 percent. In their comments on longer-term inflation expectations, a number of participants noted that, despite increases earlier this year, measures of longer-term inflation expectations had remained in ranges that were broadly consistent with the Commit- tee’s longer-run inflation goal. Others noted that it was this year’s increases that had brought these measures to levels that were broadly consistent with the Committee’s longer-run inflation goal. Participants noted that overall financial conditions re- mained highly accommodative, in part reflecting the stance of monetary policy, which continued to deliver appropriate support to the economy. Several partici- pants highlighted, however, that low interest rates were contributing to elevated house prices and that valuation pressures in housing markets might pose financial stabil- ity risks. In discussing the uncertainty and risks associated with the economic outlook, participants commented that the process of reopening the economy was unprecedented and likely to be uneven across sectors. Some partici- pants judged that supply chain disruptions and labor shortages complicated the task of assessing progress to- ward the Committee’s goals and that the speed at which these factors would dissipate was uncertain. Accord- ingly, participants judged that uncertainty around their economic projections was elevated. Although they gen- erally saw the risks to the outlook for economic activity as broadly balanced, a substantial majority of partici- pants judged that the risks to their inflation projections were tilted to the upside because of concerns that supply disruptions and labor shortages might linger for longer and might have larger or more persistent effects on prices and wages than they currently assumed. Several participants expressed concern that longer-term infla- tion expectations might rise to inappropriate levels if el- evated inflation readings persisted. Several other partic- ipants cautioned that downside risks to inflation re- Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ mained because temporary price pressures might un- wind faster than currently anticipated and because the forces that held down inflation and inflation expecta- tions during the previous economic expansion had not gone away or might reinforce the effect of the unwind- ing of temporary price pressures. In their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the Federal Reserve’s commit- ment to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy during this challenging time, thereby promot- ing the Committee’s statutory goals of maximum em- ployment and price stability. Participants generally agreed that the economic recovery was incomplete and that risks to the economic outlook remained. Although inflation had risen more than anticipated, the increase was seen as largely reflecting temporary factors, and par- ticipants expected inflation to decline toward the Com- mittee’s 2 percent longer-run objective. Participants judged that the current stance of monetary policy and policy guidance remained appropriate to pro- mote maximum employment as well as to achieve infla- tion that averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 per- cent. Participants also reiterated that the existing out- come-based guidance implied that the paths of the fed- eral funds rate and the balance sheet would depend on actual progress toward reaching the Committee’s maxi- mum-employment and inflation goals. In light of the incoming data and the implications for their economic outlooks, a few participants mentioned that they ex- pected the economic conditions set out in the Commit- tee’s forward guidance for the federal funds rate to be met somewhat earlier than they had projected in March. Several participants emphasized, however, that uncer- tainty around the economic outlook was elevated and that it was too early to draw firm conclusions about the paths of the labor market and inflation. In their view, this heightened uncertainty regarding the evolution of the economy also implied significant uncertainty about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate. Some par- ticipants noted that communications about the appro- priate path of policy would be a focus of market partici- pants in the current environment and commented that it would be important to emphasize that the Committee’s reaction function or commitment to its monetary policy framework had not changed. Participants discussed the Federal Reserve’s asset pur- chases and progress toward the Committee’s goals since last December when the Committee adopted its guid- ance for asset purchases. The Committee’s standard of “substantial further progress” was generally seen as not having yet been met, though participants expected pro- gress to continue. Various participants mentioned that they expected the conditions for beginning to reduce the pace of asset purchases to be met somewhat earlier than they had anticipated at previous meetings in light of in- coming data. Some participants saw the incoming data as providing a less clear signal about the underlying eco- nomic momentum and judged that the Committee would have information in coming months to make a better assessment of the path of the labor market and inflation. As a result, several of these participants em- phasized that the Committee should be patient in as- sessing progress toward its goals and in announcing changes to its plans for asset purchases. Participants generally judged that, as a matter of prudent planning, it was important to be well positioned to reduce the pace of asset purchases, if appropriate, in response to unex- pected economic developments, including faster-than- anticipated progress toward the Committee’s goals or the emergence of risks that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Various participants offered their views on the Commit- tee’s agency MBS purchases. Several participants saw benefits to reducing the pace of these purchases more quickly or earlier than Treasury purchases in light of val- uation pressures in housing markets. Several other par- ticipants, however, commented that reducing the pace of Treasury and MBS purchases commensurately was preferable because this approach would be well aligned with the Committee’s previous communications or be- cause purchases of Treasury securities and MBS both provide accommodation through their influence on broader financial conditions. In coming meetings, par- ticipants agreed to continue assessing the economy’s progress toward the Committee’s goals and to begin to discuss their plans for adjusting the path and composi- tion of asset purchases. In addition, participants reiter- ated their intention to provide notice well in advance of an announcement to reduce the pace of purchases. With regard to the implementation of monetary policy, participants had observed downward pressure on money market rates over the intermeeting period and viewed the possibility of further downward pressure on these rates in the near term as likely. Consequently, they noted that an adjustment to the Federal Reserve’s administered rates would help keep the federal funds rate well within the target range and support smooth market functioning of short-term funding markets. Participants agreed that Minutes of the Meeting of June 15–16, 2021Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ this technical adjustment had no bearing on the appro- priate path for the federal funds rate or the stance of monetary policy. would help foster smooth market functioning and ac- commodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that progress on vaccinations had re- duced the spread of COVID-19 in the United States. They noted that amid progress and strong policy sup- port, indicators of economic activity and employment had strengthened. Although the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remained weak, they had shown improvement. Inflation had risen, largely reflect- ing transitory factors. Overall financial conditions re- mained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Members also agreed that the path of the economy would depend sig- nificantly on the course of the virus. Progress on vac- cinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was commit- ted to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. All members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the Com- mittee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and in- flation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation having run persistently below this longer- run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expecta- tions remain well anchored at 2 percent. Members ex- pected to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until those outcomes were achieved. All members agreed to keep the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range un- til labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employ- ment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, members agreed that it would be appropriate for the Federal Reserve to continue to increase its hold- ings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency MBS by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress had been made toward the Committee’s maximum-employment and price-sta- bility goals. They judged that these asset purchases Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Members also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. Members judged that the economic outlook had contin- ued to improve and that the most negative effects of the pandemic on the economy most likely had occurred. As a result, they agreed to remove references in the FOMC statement that noted that the virus was “causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship” and that “the on- going public health crisis continues to weigh on the economy.” Instead, they agreed to say that progress on vaccinations had reduced the spread of COVID-19 and would likely continue to reduce the negative economic effects of the public health crisis. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective June 17, 2021, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. • • Increase the System Open Market Ac- count holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mort- gage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 bil- lion per month. purchase Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by additional amounts and commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. agency Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ • Conduct repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term U.S. dollar funding markets. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $80 billion per day; the per- counterparty limit can be temporarily in- creased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. Progress on vaccinations has reduced the spread of COVID-19 in the United States. Amid this progress and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employ- ment have strengthened. The sectors most ad- versely affected by the pandemic remain weak but have shown improvement. Inflation has risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. Over- all financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. house- holds and businesses. The path of the economy will depend signifi- cantly on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccinations will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the econ- omy, but risks to the economic outlook remain. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation having run persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moder- ately above 2 percent for some time so that in- flation averages 2 percent over time and longer‑term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and in- flation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, the Federal Reserve will continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mort- gage‑backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the Committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. These as- set purchases help foster smooth market func- tioning and accommodative financial condi- tions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, Randal K. Quarles, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. Minutes of the Meeting of June 15–16, 2021Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to raise the in- terest rates on required and excess reserve balances to 0.15 percent. Setting the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances 15 basis points above the bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate is intended to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the Federal Open Market Committee’s target range and to support the smooth functioning of short-term funding markets. The Board of Governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective June 17, 2021. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 27– 28, 2021. The meeting adjourned at 10:40 a.m. on June 16, 2021. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on May 18, 2021, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on April 27–28, 2021. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee July 27–28, 2021 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held by videoconference on Tuesday, July 27, 2021, at 9:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, July 28, 2021, at 9:00 a.m.1 Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Mary C. Daly Charles L. Evans Randal K. Quarles Christopher J. Waller James Bullard, Esther L. George, Naureen Hassan, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Kartik B. Athreya, Brian M. Doyle, Rochelle M. Edge, Beverly Hirtle, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account 1 In these minutes, the Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee”; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board.” Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board; Mi- chael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Jon Faust3 and Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Advisers to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Burcu Duygan- Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, Chiara Scotti, and Nitish R. Sinha, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Elizabeth Klee, Senior Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board; David E. Lebow, Michael G. Palumbo, and John J. Stevens, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Min Wei, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Brett Berger,2 Senior Adviser, Division of International Finance, Board; Ellen E. Meade and Edward Nelson, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Christopher J. Gust, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Paul R. Wood, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board Stephanie E. Curcuru2 and Andrea Raffo, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of International Finance, Board; Laura Lipscomb2 and Zeynep Senyuz, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Norman J. Morin and Karen M. Pence, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Jeffrey 2 Attended through the discussion of asset purchases. 3 Attended Wednesday’s session only. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Jennifer Gallagher, Special Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Brian J. Bonis and Etienne Gagnon,2 Assistant Direc- tors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Alyssa G. Anderson2 and Andrew Meldrum,2 Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Penelope A. Beattie,4 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board Mark A. Carlson, Senior Economic Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Erin E. Ferris2 and Andrei Zlate, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Randall A. Williams, Lead Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Isabel Cairó, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board James M. Trevino,2 Senior Economic Modeler, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Isaiah C. Ahn, Senior Staff Assistant, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Kathleen O. Paese, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Michael Dotsey, Joseph W. Gruber, and Ellis W. Tallman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas City, and Cleveland, respectively Anne Baum, Spencer Krane, David C. Wheelock, Mark L.J. Wright, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,2 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, 4 Attended through the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and New York, respectively Dina Marchioni,2 Thomas Mertens, Jon Willis, and Mark A. Wynne, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, San Francisco, Atlanta, and Dallas, respectively Jeffrey Moore2 and Brett Rose,2 Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Daniel Cooper, Senior Economist and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Ellen Correia-Golay2 and Brian Greene,2 Markets Officers, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a discussion of develop- ments in financial markets. Although there were notable moves in some asset prices over the intermeeting period, overall financial conditions ended the period little changed at historically accommodative levels. Market participants seemed to interpret communications associ- ated with the June FOMC meeting as signaling a less ac- commodative path of monetary policy than had been an- ticipated. Implied rates on interest rate futures initially rose following the meeting but subsequently retraced, and expectations regarding the path of the target federal funds rate over the next few years ended the period only modestly changed. Longer-term yields fell notably over the period, with the declines concentrated in far-forward rates. A significant portion of these movements seemed to reflect changes in term premiums. Market participants pointed to a number of factors as driving the movement in longer- term yields, most prominently including Federal Reserve policy communications, investor positioning, and changes in expectations regarding the course of the pan- demic. With respect to the path of net asset purchases, respond- ents to the Open Market Desk’s surveys of primary deal- ers and market participants expected communications on asset purchases to evolve gradually, with signals an- ticipated over coming months regarding both the Com- mittee’s assessment of conditions constituting “substan- Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ tial further progress” and details on tapering plans. Al- most 60 percent of respondents anticipated the first re- duction in the pace of net asset purchases to come in January, though, on average, respondents placed some- what more weight than in the June surveys on the possi- bility of tapering beginning somewhat earlier. With re- spect to the pace of tapering, respondents continued to anticipate that the Committee would take a gradual ap- proach. While market participants discussed the possi- bility of an earlier or faster-than-proportional reduction in the pace of net purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), most survey respondents appeared to expect the timing and pace of tapering of net purchases of agency MBS and Treasury securities to be similar. The manager turned next to a discussion of develop- ments in operations and money markets over the period. Following the June meeting, overnight rates rose in line with the technical adjustment in administered rates and were relatively stable for the remainder of the period. Overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) take-up jumped by over $200 billion after the technical adjustment took effect, as government-sponsored enter- prises moved balances held in unremunerated Federal Reserve deposit accounts into the higher-yielding ON RRP investments. Government money market funds also increased their participation in the facility amid a continued decline in Treasury bills outstanding and downward pressure on overnight rates. Overall, market participants reported that the technical adjustment went smoothly and that, with overnight rates having moved further away from zero, concerns about the functioning of short-term funding markets had diminished. Looking ahead, market participants were beginning to focus on the potential effects of changes in the Treasury General Account at the Federal Reserve and Treasury bill issuance over coming months in connection with the debt ceiling. The manager noted that, if a number of counterparties reached the per-counterparty limit on their ON RRP investments and downward pressure on overnight rates emerged, it may become appropriate to lift the limit. Establishment of Standing Repurchase Agreement Facilities Finally, the manager summarized the proposed terms for the standing repurchase agreement (repo) facility (SRF) and the Foreign and International Monetary Authorities (FIMA) Repo Facility. In questions and comments fol- lowing the manager’s briefing, participants expressed broad support for the establishment of the SRF and FIMA Repo Facility. The vast majority of participants supported the proposed terms, although a few partici- pants raised questions, including whether the proposed aggregate cap of $500 billion was necessary, whether the collateral eligible in SRF operations should be limited to Treasury securities only, and how the setting of the min- imum bid rate in SRF operations would be expected to evolve over time relative to the primary credit rate and the interest on reserve balances rate. In general, partici- pants viewed the SRF and FIMA Repo Facility as im- portant new tools, serving in backstop roles, that would support effective policy implementation and smooth market functioning. Participants anticipated that the Committee would learn more about how these facilities operate over time and noted that it could adjust some parameters of the facilities on the basis of that experi- ence. The Committee voted unanimously to approve the es- tablishment of the SRF. All but one member of the Committee voted to approve the FIMA Repo Facility. Governor Bowman abstained from voting on the FIMA Repo Facility and noted that she would have preferred that the liquidity arrangements accessible to foreign of- ficial institutions be maintained only during periods of extraordinary financial market stress rather than through a standing facility. Standing Repurchase Agreement Facility Resolu- tion The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Commit- tee”) authorizes and directs the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (the “Selected Bank”), for the System Open Market Account (“SOMA”), to conduct operations in which it offers to purchase securities, subject to an agreement to resell (“repurchase agreement transactions”). The repurchase agreement transactions hereby authorized and directed shall (i) include only U.S. Treasury securities, agency debt securities, and agency mortgage-backed securities; (ii) be conducted as open market operations with pri- mary dealers and depository institutions as participants; (iii) be conducted with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 per- cent; (iv) be offered on an overnight basis (except that the Open Market Desk at the Selected Bank may extend the term for longer than an overnight term to accommo- date weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions); and (v) be subject to an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. The aggregate operation limit can be tem- porarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. These operations shall be conducted by the Open Market Desk at the Selected Bank until otherwise directed by the Committee. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 27–28, 2021Page 3 Standing FIMA Repurchase Agreement Resolution The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Commit- tee”) authorizes and directs the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (the “Selected the System Open Market Account Bank”), for (“SOMA”), to offer to purchase U.S. Treasury securities subject to an agreement to resell (“repurchase agreement transactions”) with foreign central bank and interna- tional accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank (the “Foreign Accounts”). The repurchase agreement transactions hereby authorized and directed shall (i) in- clude only U.S. Treasury securities; (ii) be conducted with Foreign Accounts approved in advance by the For- eign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”); (iii) be conducted at an offering rate of 0.25 percent; (iv) be offered on an overnight basis (except that the Open Market Desk at the Selected Bank may extend the term for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions); and (v) be subject to a per-counterparty limit of $60 billion per day. The Subcommittee may approve changes in the offering rate, the maturity of the transactions, eligible Foreign Accounts counterparties (either by approving or removing account access), and the counterparty limit; and the Subcommittee shall keep the Committee in- formed of any such changes. These transactions shall be undertaken by the Open Market Desk at the Selected Bank until otherwise directed by the Committee. The Open Market Desk at the Selected Bank will also report at least annually to the Committee on facility usage and the list of approved account holders. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Discussion of Asset Purchases Participants discussed aspects of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases, including progress made toward the Committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals since the adoption of the asset purchase guidance in December 2020. They also considered the question of how asset purchases might be adjusted once eco- nomic conditions met the standards of that guidance. Participants agreed that their discussion at this meeting would be helpful background for the Committee’s future decisions about modifying asset purchases. No deci- sions regarding future adjustments to asset purchases were made at this meeting. The participants’ discussion was preceded by staff presentations that reviewed the principal channels through which asset purchases exert effects on financial conditions and the economy, with a focus on the impli- cations of these channels for the Committee’s delibera- tions regarding future adjustments to the Federal Re- serve’s asset purchases. The presentations noted that, in the staff’s standard empirical modeling framework, the effect of asset purchases on financial and economic con- ditions occurred primarily via their influence on the ex- pected path of private-sector holdings of longer-term as- sets. In that framework, larger Federal Reserve holdings of these assets reduced private-sector holdings, exerting downward pressure on term premiums and, conse- quently, keeping longer-term interest rates and overall fi- nancial conditions more accommodative than they oth- erwise would be. The staff noted that, because plausible alternative approaches to the tapering of asset purchases would likely not lead to significant differences in the ex- pected path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, these approaches would have similar financial and economic effects in the staff’s standard framework. The presenta- tions highlighted, however, that alternative tapering ap- proaches could have significant financial and economic effects not fully captured in the staff’s standard empirical framework. In particular, changes in asset purchases could be interpreted by the public as signaling a shift in the Committee’s view of the economic outlook or in its overall policy strategy, with implications for the ex- pected path of the federal funds rate. Changes in the flow of asset purchases could also influence yields, but this influence would likely be modest outside of periods of stressed financial market conditions. In their discussion of considerations related to asset pur- chases, various participants noted that these purchases were an important part of the monetary policy toolkit and a critical aspect of the Federal Reserve’s response to the economic effects of the pandemic, supporting smooth financial market functioning and accommoda- tive financial conditions, which aided the flow of credit to households and businesses and supported the recov- ery. Participants discussed a broad range of labor market and inflation indicators. All participants assessed that the economy had made progress toward the Commit- tee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals since the adoption of the guidance on asset purchases in December. Most participants judged that the Commit- tee’s standard of “substantial further progress” toward the maximum-employment goal had not yet been met. At the same time, most participants remarked that this standard had been achieved with respect to the price- Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ stability goal. A few participants noted, however, that the transitory nature of this year’s rise in inflation, as well as the recent declines in longer-term yields and in mar- ket-based measures of inflation compensation, cast doubt on the degree of progress that had been made to- ward the price-stability goal since December. Looking ahead, most participants noted that, provided that the economy were to evolve broadly as they anticipated, they judged that it could be appropriate to start reducing the pace of asset purchases this year because they saw the Committee’s “substantial further progress” criterion as satisfied with respect to the price-stability goal and as close to being satisfied with respect to the maximum- employment goal. Various participants commented that economic and financial conditions would likely warrant a reduction in coming months. Several others indicated, however, that a reduction in the pace of asset purchases was more likely to become appropriate early next year because they saw prevailing conditions in the labor mar- ket as not being close to meeting the Committee’s “sub- stantial further progress” standard or because of uncer- tainty about the degree of progress toward the price-sta- bility goal. Participants agreed that the Committee would provide advance notice before making changes to its balance sheet policy. Participants expressed a range of views on the appropri- ate pace of tapering asset purchases once economic con- ditions satisfied the criterion laid out in the Committee’s guidance. Many participants saw potential benefits in a pace of tapering that would end net asset purchases be- fore the conditions currently specified in the Commit- tee’s forward guidance on the federal funds rate were likely to be met. At the same time, participants indicated that the standards for raising the target range for the fed- eral funds rate were distinct from those associated with tapering asset purchases and remarked that the timing of those actions would depend on the course of the econ- omy. Several participants noted that an earlier start to tapering could be accompanied by more gradual reduc- tions in the purchase pace and that such a combination could mitigate the risk of an excessive tightening in fi- nancial conditions in response to a tapering announce- ment. Participants exchanged views on what the composition of asset purchases should be during the tapering process. Most participants remarked that they saw benefits in re- ducing the pace of net purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS proportionally in order to end both sets of purchases at the same time. These participants ob- served that such an approach would be consistent with the Committee’s understanding that purchases of Treas- ury securities and agency MBS had similar effects on broader financial conditions and played similar roles in the transmission of monetary policy, or that these pur- chases were not intended as credit allocation. Some of these participants remarked, however, that they wel- comed further discussion of the appropriate composi- tion of asset purchases during the tapering process. Sev- eral participants commented on the benefits that they saw in reducing agency MBS purchases more quickly than Treasury securities purchases, noting that the hous- ing sector was exceptionally strong and did not need ei- ther actual or perceived support from the Federal Re- serve in the form of agency MBS purchases or that such purchases could be interpreted as a type of credit alloca- tion. Participants commented on other factors that were rele- vant for their consideration of future adjustments to the pace of asset purchases. Many participants noted that, when a reduction in the pace of asset purchases became appropriate, it would be important that the Committee clearly reaffirm the absence of any mechanical link be- tween the timing of tapering and that of an eventual in- crease in the target range for the federal funds rate. A few participants suggested that the Committee would need to be mindful of the risk that a tapering announce- ment that was perceived to be premature could bring into question the Committee’s commitment to its new monetary policy framework. With respect to the effects of the pandemic, several participants indicated that they would adjust their views on the appropriate path of asset purchases if the economic effects of new strains of the virus turned out to be notably worse than currently an- ticipated and significantly hindered progress toward the Committee’s goals. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the July 27–28 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) had increased in the second quarter at a faster pace than in the first quarter of the year. Indicators of labor market conditions were mixed in June, though la- bor demand remained strong. Consumer price inflation through May—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index—had picked up notably, largely reflecting transitory factors. Total nonfarm payroll employment rose sharply in June, with job gains widespread across industries and espe- cially strong job growth in the leisure and hospitality sec- tor. As of June, total payroll employment had retraced _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 27–28, 2021Page 5 more than two-thirds of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. The unemployment rate edged higher and stood at 5.9 percent in June, and the unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics remained well above the national average. The labor force partic- ipation rate and employment-to-population ratio were unchanged in June. May private-sector job openings, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Sur- vey, remained at the highest recorded level since the sur- vey’s inception in 2000. Initial claims for regular state unemployment insurance were little changed, on net, since mid-June. Weekly estimates of private-sector pay- rolls constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff using data provided by the payroll processor ADP that were available through the first part of July suggested that the pace of private employment gains had remained strong. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose further in June. Recent monthly increases in average hourly earnings appeared to reflect a combination of strong la- bor demand and increased difficulties in hiring that had more than offset the downward pressure on average earnings from disproportionately large employment gains in lower-wage industries. Information from com- pensation measures that were judged to be less affected by shifts in the composition of the workforce was mixed: A staff measure of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the ADP data had stepped up notice- ably in June relative to earlier in the year; by contrast, the Wage Growth Tracker measure constructed by the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Atlanta had not shown a similar pickup. Recent 12-month change measures of inflation, using ei- ther PCE prices or the consumer price index (CPI), had been boosted by base effects as the extremely low infla- tion readings from the spring of 2020 rolled out of the calculation. In addition, a surge in demand as the econ- omy reopened further, combined with production bot- tlenecks and supply constraints, had pushed up recent monthly price increases. Total PCE price inflation was 3.9 percent over the 12 months ending in May, and core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in con- sumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in May. In contrast, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 1.9 percent in May. In June, the 12-month change in the CPI was 5.4 percent, while the core CPI rose 4.5 percent over the same period. In the second quarter of 2021, the staff’s common inflation expecta- tions index, which combines information from many in- dicators of inflation expectations and inflation compen- sation, had more than reversed the moderate decline rec- orded in the middle of last year and had returned to the level that prevailed in 2014, when actual inflation was relatively modest. Real PCE appeared to have risen in the second quarter at a pace similar to that seen in the first quarter, sup- ported by previous rounds of federal stimulus payments and reductions in social distancing. Even so, consumer spending appeared to have been held back some as pro- ducers struggled to meet demand. Similarly, despite very strong demand for housing, incoming data suggested that residential investment spending had declined in the second quarter as materials shortages and limited stocks of homes for sale temporarily restrained activity in that sector. Available indicators suggested that growth in business fixed investment had slowed sharply in the second quar- ter, reflecting disruptions to motor vehicle production and aircraft deliveries and a faster rate of decline in non- residential structures investment. Growth in manufacturing output had picked up mod- estly in the second quarter. Although production in the chemicals industry had rebounded from the weather-re- lated disruptions earlier in the year, the supply chain is- sues faced by a number of other industries, particularly the motor vehicle industry, continued to weigh on over- all factory output. Total real government purchases appeared to have moved lower in the second quarter after having risen in the first quarter. Available data suggested that federal nondefense purchases had dropped following a first- quarter surge in pandemic-related expenditures and that defense purchases were little changed. However, indica- tors of real state and local purchases pointed to a modest second-quarter increase in this component of govern- ment spending. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit remained high in May. Real goods imports in May retraced only a bit of their April decline, but they were still at the sec- ond-highest level on record. Real goods exports edged down in May and remained below pre-COVID-19 lev- els. Bottlenecks in the global semiconductor industry continued to weigh on exports and imports of automo- tive products, and shipping congestion likely continued to restrain trade overall. Although international travel recovered further in May, exports and imports of ser- vices remained depressed relative to pre-pandemic lev- els. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Incoming data suggested that, after a weak start to the year, foreign economic activity accelerated in the second quarter. The improvements were concentrated in the advanced foreign economies and China, supported by vaccine rollouts, the unwinding of public health re- strictions, economic adaptation to the virus, and the re- opening of the services sector. The situation was quite different in some emerging market economies (EMEs) whose low vaccination rates left them vulnerable to new waves of infections. Although new COVID-19 cases fell dramatically in India after the surge in May and June, the situation deteriorated markedly in several Southeast Asian countries, whose cases and deaths rose to all-time highs. In addition, the increased prevalence of new virus variants, particularly the Delta variant, underscored the continued uncertainty about the foreign outlook. Infla- tion rose further in most foreign economies, reflecting a reversal of price declines seen in the spring of 2020, higher energy and commodity prices, and supply bottle- necks. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, fluctuations in financial markets appeared to be driven by less-accommodative- than-expected June FOMC communications, a reduc- tion in investor perceptions of the risk of persistently high inflation, increased concerns about the rapid spread of the Delta variant, and stronger-than-anticipated infla- tion data. Longer-dated Treasury yields fell, largely re- flecting declines in real yields, while longer-horizon for- ward measures of inflation compensation also declined. Domestic equity prices rose moderately, and corporate bond spreads remained near the low end of their histor- ical ranges. Short-term funding markets were stable, while participation in the ON RRP facility increased fur- ther, to its highest level since the facility was put in place. Market-based financing conditions were accommoda- tive, and bank lending standards eased for most loan cat- egories. The Treasury yield curve flattened, on net, with the 2-year yield about unchanged, the 5-year yield declining a bit, and the 10- and 30-year yields each decreasing about 30 basis points. The decline in longer-term Treas- ury yields was associated with a drop in real yields im- plied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), with the 10-year real yield down about 25 basis points. Meanwhile, shorter-horizon measures of inflation com- pensation ended the period modestly higher, but longer- term forward measures fell notably. On net, the market- implied path of the policy rate was little changed for ho- rizons up to late 2023, while it shifted lower beyond those horizons. Broad stock market prices rose moderately over the in- termeeting period, supported in part by some strong sec- ond-quarter earnings reports that bolstered investor risk sentiment. However, some prices declined for stocks that historically have moved more closely with economic conditions—such as stocks for smaller companies and for firms in cyclical industries—as did stock prices for firms in sectors such as airlines and hotels that were neg- atively affected by the pandemic. Bank stock prices also fell. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—spiked to reach a two-month high. For the intermeeting period as a whole, however, the VIX was little changed, on net, and remained somewhat above its average pre-pandemic levels. Spreads of yields on corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities were little changed, and spreads of benchmark municipal bond indexes increased moder- ately, although both remained below their pre-pandemic levels. Short-term funding markets were stable over the inter- meeting period. Following the actions at the June FOMC meeting to increase both the interest rate on ex- cess reserves and the ON RRP rate by 5 basis points, the effective federal funds rate rose 4 basis points, reaching 10 basis points, while the Secured Overnight Financing Rate rose 4 basis points, reaching 5 basis points. These funding rates remained at these levels for most of the period. Participation in the Federal Reserve’s ON RRP operations continued to increase to its highest level since the facility was put in place, from an average of $340 bil- lion in the previous intermeeting period to an average of around $800 billion over the current intermeeting pe- riod, and reached almost $1 trillion on the June quarter- end. The increase in participation was driven in part by larger investments from money market funds, as ongo- ing reductions in net Treasury bill issuance contributed to downward pressure on yields of other investment op- tions available to these funds. Concerns about the worldwide spread of the Delta vari- ant weighed somewhat on risk sentiment in global finan- cial markets over the intermeeting period. The dollar broadly appreciated, longer-term yields in major ad- vanced foreign economies decreased notably, and most major foreign equity indexes declined moderately. Eq- uity markets in China and Hong Kong underperformed notably amid increased regulatory uncertainty in China. In addition, EME sovereign credit spreads widened slightly, but capital flows into dedicated EME funds re- mained modestly positive. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 27–28, 2021Page 7 Several foreign central banks scaled back their asset pur- chase programs. The Bank of Canada and the Reserve Bank of Australia reduced the pace of their asset pur- chases, and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand unexpect- edly announced that it would halt its asset purchases in July. In emerging markets, the central banks of Brazil and Mexico raised rates in order to reduce inflationary pressures. In contrast, the People’s Bank of China cut the broad reserve requirement ratio for banks to support economic growth. The European Central Bank com- pleted its strategy review, adopting a 2 percent symmet- ric inflation target, and revised forward guidance on its policy rate. Financing conditions faced by nonfinancial firms in cap- ital markets continued to be broadly accommodative over the intermeeting period, as corporate bond spreads remained near the low end of their historical distribu- tions. Gross issuance of corporate bonds slowed from its brisk pace in May but remained solid, and gross issu- ance of leveraged loans was also robust. Equity raised through traditional initial public offerings rebounded noticeably, while equity raised through seasoned equity offerings continued to be moderate in June. Meanwhile, equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies remained subdued. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans outstanding at banks continued to decline in June, with forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Program loans more than offset- ting the volumes of new loan originations. In the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported easing standards and nearly all terms, on net, for C&I loans over the second quarter. The July SLOOS also indicated that the level of standards on C&I loans returned to the easier end of the range that had prevailed since 2005. Banks surveyed in the July SLOOS reported that demand for C&I loans had improved over the second quarter; however, market commentary suggested that demand was still generally weak. The credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations re- mained stable over the intermeeting period. The volume of credit rating upgrades for nonfinancial corporate bonds and leveraged loans moderately outpaced down- grades in June. Corporate bond and leveraged loan de- faults also remained low. Financing conditions in the municipal bond market re- mained accommodative over the intermeeting period, with municipal bond yields edging down to record lows. Issuance of municipal bonds was solid in the case of higher-rated bonds, while it was still below pre-pan- demic levels for speculative-grade and unrated securities. The credit quality of municipal debt appeared stable, al- though pandemic-related risks to state and local govern- ment finances remained. Financing conditions facing small businesses remained relatively tight, and their loan demand was generally weak. Although the July SLOOS banks reported, on net, easier lending standards for C&I loans to small firms over the second quarter, industry commentary suggested that the lending standards of community banks and of other lenders not included in the SLOOS remained rel- atively tight. Furthermore, the results of a separate sur- vey suggested that the share of firms that did not want to borrow remained near its all-time high. Meanwhile, loan performance for small businesses continued to im- prove, with delinquency rates continuing to decline in May. For commercial real estate (CRE) financed through cap- ital markets, financing conditions remained accommo- dative. Spreads of agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) were generally at or below pre-pandemic levels. Issuance of agency CMBS remained robust and issuance of non-agency CMBS strengthened notably in June. Delinquency rates on mortgages in CMBS pools were little changed but con- tinued to be elevated on hotel and retail mortgages. Meanwhile, bank-based financing conditions for CRE remained relatively tight. CRE loan growth at banks re- mained weak in the second quarter in comparison with pre-pandemic levels. In the July SLOOS, banks re- ported that, despite some easing over the second quar- ter, the levels of CRE lending standards were still tight relative to the midpoint of the range of standards that had prevailed since 2005. Financing conditions in the residential real estate market remained accommodative. This was particularly true for stronger borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. In addition, according to the July SLOOS, bank lending standards for jumbo loans eased over the second quarter to near their pre-pandemic levels. However, al- though broad financing conditions for lower-score Fed- eral Housing Administration borrowers also continued to ease, their credit standards remained tighter than be- fore the pandemic. Mortgage rates ticked down over the intermeeting period, in line with rates on MBS and 10-year Treasury securities. Furthermore, the spread of mortgage rates to MBS yields was close to pre-pandemic levels after having widened significantly at the start of Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the pandemic. Mortgage originations for home pur- chases and refinancing were fairly robust through June. Financing conditions for consumer credit remained ac- commodative. Consumer credit jumped in May and re- mained strong in June, reflecting a rebound in credit card balances and continued robust growth in auto loans. Banks in the July SLOOS reported stronger demand and easier standards for both credit cards and auto loans over the second quarter. The staff provided an update on its assessments of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, charac- terized the financial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as notable. The staff judged that asset valuation pressures were elevated. In particular, the forward price- to-earnings ratio for the S&P 500 index stood at the up- per end of its historical distribution; high-yield corporate bond spreads tightened further and were near the low end of their historical range; and house prices continued to increase rapidly, leaving valuation measures stretched. That said, the staff did not see signs of loose mortgage underwriting standards or excessive credit growth that could potentially amplify a shock arising from falling house prices. The staff assessed vulnerabilities associ- ated with nonfinancial leverage as lower than in January but still notable. For households, the mortgage debt-to- income ratio was moderate, and mortgage borrowing was concentrated among prime borrowers, though some uncertainty remained regarding the outlook for mort- gages in non-payment status. While measures of corpo- rate-sector leverage fell since January, particularly at the most levered firms, the debt of firms that had relatively low earnings-to-interest payment ratios remained high. The staff judged that vulnerabilities arising from finan- cial leverage were moderate. The aggregate common eq- uity tier 1 capital ratio of the largest banks significantly exceeded regulatory requirements. However, some available measures of hedge fund leverage were elevated, and significant data gaps continued to obscure risks at hedge funds and other nonbank financial institutions. Vulnerabilities associated with funding risks were char- acterized as moderate. Domestic banks held significant quantities of high-quality liquid assets and had only lim- ited reliance on short-term wholesale funding. None- theless, significant structural vulnerabilities remained at entities such as prime money funds, and new financial arrangements such as stablecoins appeared to have the same structural maturity and liquidity transformation vulnerabilities but with less transparency and an under- developed regulatory framework. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the July FOMC meeting was little changed, on balance, from the June forecast. In the second half of 2021, an easing of the surge in demand seen over the first part of the year was expected to be largely offset by a reduction in the effects of supply constraints on pro- duction, thereby allowing real GDP growth to continue at a rapid pace. For the year as a whole, therefore, real GDP was projected to post a substantial increase, with a correspondingly large decline in the unemployment rate. With the boost to spending growth from continued re- ductions in social distancing assumed to fade after 2021 and with a further unwinding of the effects of fiscal stim- ulus, GDP growth was expected to step down in 2022 and 2023. However, with monetary policy assumed to remain highly accommodative, the staff continued to an- ticipate that real GDP growth would outpace growth in potential output over most of this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low lev- els. The staff’s near-term outlook for inflation was revised up further in response to incoming data, but the staff continued to expect that this year’s rise in inflation would prove to be transitory. The 12-month change in total and core PCE prices was well above 2 percent in May, and available data suggested that PCE price infla- tion would remain high in June. The staff continued to judge that the surge in demand that had resulted as the economy reopened further had combined with produc- tion bottlenecks and supply constraints to boost recent monthly inflation rates. The staff expected the 12-month change in PCE prices to move down gradually over the second part of 2021, reflecting an anticipated moderation in monthly inflation rates and the waning of base effects; even so, PCE price inflation was projected to be running well above 2 percent at the end of the year. Over the following year, the boost to consumer prices caused by supply issues was expected to partly reverse, and import prices were expected to decelerate sharply; as a result, PCE price inflation was expected to step down to a little below 2 percent in 2022 before addi- tional increases in resource utilization raised it to 2 per- cent in 2023. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside and that the uncertainty around the forecast was elevated. In particular, the probability that the course of the pandemic would turn out to be more ad- verse than the staff’s baseline assumption was viewed to _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 27–28, 2021Page 9 be higher than the probability that a more favorable out- come would occur. However, the staff judged that the risks around the inflation projection were now tilted to the upside, as recent data pointed to a greater risk that the upward pressure on inflation that had resulted from supply-related issues would unwind more slowly than the staff’s baseline projection assumed. Participants’ Views on Current Economic Condi- tions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that, with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and em- ployment had continued to strengthen. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had shown im- provement but had not fully recovered. Inflation had risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. Overall finan- cial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflect- ing policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Par- ticipants noted that the path of the economy would con- tinue to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. Participants observed that economic activity continued to expand at a rapid pace through the middle of the year even though capacity constraints were restraining the in- crease in output in some sectors. Economic growth was expected to remain strong over the second half of the year, supported by the further reopening of the econ- omy, accommodative financial conditions, and easing of supply constraints. Nevertheless, participants generally saw supply disruptions and labor shortages as likely to persist over the second half of the year. In their discussion of the household sector, participants remarked that consumer spending had continued to in- crease at a very rapid pace, supported by the ongoing reopening of the economy along with the accommoda- tion provided by fiscal policy and monetary policy. In addition, the accumulated stock of savings and further progress on vaccination were cited as important factors lifting household spending. Some participants noted that they expected consumer spending to continue to be bolstered by these factors. Participants generally ex- pected housing demand to remain strong but noted that construction had been restrained by shortages of mate- rials and other inputs and that home sales had been held back by limited supplies of available homes. With respect to the business sector, participants ob- served that activity in the service industries most ad- versely affected by the pandemic, such as in the leisure and hospitality sector, was rebounding as the economy reopened further but had not fully recovered. Partici- pants noted that growth in manufacturing activity con- tinued to be solid but was restrained by production bot- tlenecks and supply constraints, particularly in the motor vehicle sector. Citing reports received from contacts in a broad range of industries, participants indicated that shortages of materials and labor as well as supply chain challenges remained widespread and continued to limit the ability of firms to keep up with strong demand. Even though their outlook for demand had improved further, many business contacts had expressed uncertainty and pessimism over prospects regarding the easing of supply constraints over the near term. Participants commented on the continued improvement in labor market conditions in recent months driven by strong demand for workers. The monthly pace of job gains had picked up, with employment expanding 850,000 in June and with notable increases in the leisure and hospitality sector. Nevertheless, the household sur- vey showed that the unemployment rate remained ele- vated at 5.9 percent in June, and the labor force partici- pation rate and employment-to-population ratio were lit- tle changed in recent months. Participants indicated that the economy had not yet achieved the Committee’s broad-based and inclusive maximum-employment goal. Several participants remarked that the labor market re- covery continued to be uneven across demographic and income groups and across sectors. Participants generally noted that supply-side factors related to the pandemic— such as caregiving needs, ongoing fears of the virus, in- creased retirements, and expanded unemployment in- surance payments—continued to weigh on labor force participation and employment growth. A majority of participants anticipated that most of these factors would ease in the coming months. They also noted, however, that the spread of the Delta variant may temporarily de- lay the full reopening of the economy and restrain hiring and labor supply. Participants observed that recent wage increases had been moderate on average. However, District contacts had continued to report having trouble hiring workers and had indicated that this difficulty was putting upward pressure on wages in some sectors or leading employers to provide additional incentives to attract and retain workers. Several participants noted that their District contacts expected that difficulties finding workers would likely extend into the fall. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ In their discussion of inflation, participants observed that the inflation rate had increased notably and ex- pected that it would likely remain elevated in coming months before moderating. Participants remarked that inflation had increased generally more than expected this year and attributed this increase to supply constraints in product and labor markets and a surge in consumer de- mand as the economy reopened. They noted that many of their District contacts had reported that higher input costs were also putting upward pressure on prices. Many participants pointed out that the largest contributors to recent increases in measures of inflation were a handful of sectors most affected by temporary supply bottle- necks or sectors in which price levels were rebounding from depressed levels as the economy continued to reo- pen. Looking ahead, while participants generally ex- pected inflation pressures to ease as the effect of these transitory factors dissipated, several participants re- marked that larger-than-anticipated supply chain disrup- tions and increases in input costs could sustain upward pressure on prices into 2022. In their comments on in- flation expectations, some participants noted that measures of longer-term inflation expectations had re- mained in ranges that were viewed as broadly consistent with the Committee’s longer-run inflation goal. Several participants indicated that the recent increases in survey- based measures signaled a risk that longer-term inflation expectations might be moving up above levels consistent with the Committee’s goals. Other participants pointed to the substantial decline in TIPS-based longer-term in- flation compensation since June as suggesting that inves- tors perceived reduced risks that inflation could run per- sistently above the Committee’s 2 percent goal. A cou- ple of participants noted that recent readings on forward inflation compensation could be read as suggesting in- vestor concern that inflation over the longer term could run persistently below the Committee’s 2 percent infla- tion goal. In discussing the uncertainty and risks associated with the economic outlook, many participants remarked that uncertainty was quite high, with slowing in progress on vaccinations and developments surrounding the Delta variant posing downside risks to the economic outlook. A number of participants judged that the effects of sup- ply chain disruptions and labor shortages would likely complicate the task of interpreting the incoming data and assessing the speed at which these supply-side fac- tors would dissipate. Some participants noted that there were upside risks to inflation associated with concerns that supply disruptions and labor shortages might linger for longer than currently anticipated and might have larger or more persistent effects on prices and wages than they currently assumed. Participants who commented on financial stability em- phasized the risks associated with elevated valuations across many asset classes. A few participants highlighted scenarios in which a prolonged period of low interest rates and broadly elevated asset valuations could gener- ate imbalances, which could increase financial stability risks. Some participants commented on the housing market and noted that ongoing rapid house price in- creases reflected both demand and supply factors. Sev- eral participants noted that the lack of evidence of dete- riorating mortgage underwriting standards could miti- gate risks associated with high housing valuations; a cou- ple of other participants, however, expressed concern that a home price reversal could pose risks to financial stability. Some participants cited various potential risks to financial stability including the risks associated with expanded use of cryptocurrencies or the risks associated with collateral liquidity at central counterparties during episodes of market stress. In connection with the for- mer set of risks, a few of these participants highlighted the fragility and the general lack of transparency associ- ated with stablecoins, the importance of monitoring them closely, and the need to develop an appropriate regulatory framework to address any risks to financial stability associated with such products. In their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the Federal Reserve’s commit- ment to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy during this challenging time, thereby pro- moting the Committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. Participants judged that the current stance of monetary policy remained appro- priate to promote maximum employment as well as to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent. Participants also reiterated that the existing outcome-based guidance implied that the paths of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet would depend on actual progress toward reaching the Committee’s maximum-employment and inflation goals. Participants discussed the progress toward the Commit- tee’s goals since December 2020, when the Committee adopted its guidance for asset purchases. They generally judged that the Committee’s standard of “substantial further progress” toward the maximum-employment and inflation goals had not yet been met, particularly with respect to labor market conditions, and that risks to _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 27–28, 2021Page 11 the economic outlook remained. Most participants an- ticipated that the economy would continue to make pro- gress toward those goals and, provided that the economy evolved broadly as they anticipated, they judged that the standard set out in the Committee’s guidance regarding asset purchases could be reached this year. With regard to the labor market, participants noted that the demand for workers had been strong in recent months, while the level of employment had been constrained by labor sup- ply shortages and hiring difficulties. Several participants emphasized that employment remained well below its pre-pandemic level and that a robust labor market, sup- ported by a continuation of accommodative monetary policy, would allow further progress toward the Com- mittee’s broad and inclusive maximum-employment goal and a return over time to labor market conditions as strong as those prevailing before the pandemic. A few other participants judged that monetary policy had lim- ited ability to address the labor supply shortages and hir- ing difficulties currently constraining the level of em- ployment. Several participants also commented that the pandemic might have caused longer-lasting changes in the labor market and that the pre-pandemic labor market conditions may not be the right benchmark against which the Committee should assess the progress toward its maximum-employment objective. With regard to inflation, participants commented that re- cent inflation readings had been boosted by the effects of supply bottlenecks and labor shortages and were likely to be transitory. A few participants noted that, while the specific results depended on the period used in the cal- culation, some measures of average inflation were al- ready moving above, or would soon move above, the Committee’s 2 percent goal, supported by strong de- mand, a tight labor market, and firming inflation expec- tations. Some other participants emphasized that recent high inflation readings had largely been driven by price increases in a handful of categories. These participants pointed out that there was no evidence of broad-based price pressures or of inappropriately high longer-term inflation expectations. Several participants also com- mented that price increases concentrated in a small num- ber of categories were unlikely to change underlying in- flation dynamics sufficiently to overcome the possibility of a persistent downward bias in inflation, as might be associated with the effective lower bound on the policy rate. Many participants remarked upon risk-management considerations when contemplating how and when to make changes to the Committee’s pace of asset pur- chases. Some participants suggested that it would be prudent for the Committee to prepare for starting to re- duce its pace of asset purchases relatively soon, in light of the risk that the recent high inflation readings could prove to be more persistent than they had anticipated and because an earlier start to reducing asset purchases would most likely enable additions to securities holdings to be concluded before the Committee judged it appro- priate to raise the federal funds rate. A few participants expressed concerns that maintaining highly accommo- dative financial conditions might contribute to a further buildup in risk to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s dual-mandate goals. In contrast, a few other participants suggested that prep- arations for reducing the pace of asset purchases should encompass the possibility that the reductions might not occur for some time and highlighted the risks that rising COVID-19 cases associated with the spread of the Delta variant could cause delays in returning to work and school and so damp the economic recovery. Several par- ticipants also remained concerned about the medium- term outlook for inflation and the possibility of the reemergence of significant downward pressure on infla- tion, especially in light of the recent decline in longer- term inflation compensation. In addition, several partic- ipants emphasized that there was considerable uncer- tainty about the likely resolution of the labor market shortages and supply bottlenecks and about the influ- ence of pandemic-related developments on longer-run labor market and inflation dynamics. Those participants stressed that the Committee should be patient in as- sessing progress toward its goals and in announcing changes to its plans on asset purchases. Some participants emphasized that a decision to reduce the Committee’s pace of asset purchases once the “sub- stantial further progress” benchmark had been achieved would be fully consistent with the Committee’s new monetary policy framework and would help foster the achievement of the Committee’s longer-run objectives over time. A couple of participants also noted that a ta- pering of asset purchases did not amount to a tightening of the stance of monetary policy and instead only im- plied that additional monetary accommodation would be provided at a slower rate. Several participants empha- sized that an announcement of a reduction in the Com- mittee’s pace of asset purchases should not be inter- preted as the beginning of a predetermined course for raising the federal funds rate from its current level. Those participants stressed that the Committee’s assess- ment regarding the appropriate timing of an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate was separate from its current deliberations on asset purchases and Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ would be subject to the higher standard, as laid out in the Committee’s outcome-based guidance on the federal funds rate. Nonetheless, a couple of participants cau- tioned that it could be challenging for the public to dis- entangle deliberations about the two tools and that any decisions the Committee made on its asset purchases would likely influence the public’s understanding of the Committee’s other policy intentions, including with re- gard to future decisions concerning the target range for the federal funds rate. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. They noted that the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had shown improvement but had not fully re- covered. Inflation had risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. Overall financial conditions remained accom- modative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Members also acknowledged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccinations would likely con- tinue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook re- mained. Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was commit- ted to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. All members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the Com- mittee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and in- flation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation having run persistently below this longer- run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expecta- tions remain well anchored at 2 percent. Members ex- pected to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until those outcomes were achieved. All members agreed to keep the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range un- til labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employ- ment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. Last December, the Committee indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency mortgage- backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress had been made toward its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. The members commented that, since then, the economy had made progress toward these goals, and they agreed to continue to assess progress in coming meetings. They judged that these asset purchases would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative finan- cial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Members also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. Members agreed that the postmeeting statement should acknowledge the economy’s continued recovery as well as its progress toward the Committee’s maximum-em- ployment and price-stability goals set forth in the Com- mittee’s asset purchase guidance in December. In light of these developments, members decided to remove the characterization of sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic as being in a “weak” condition and to re- place it with the judgment that those sectors “have not fully recovered.” They also agreed to remove the word “significantly” when characterizing the dependence of the path of the economy on the course of the virus. In addition, members agreed to insert the assessment that “the economy has made progress” toward the Commit- tee’s longer-run goals since the guidance on asset pur- chases was first issued in December and to indicate that the assessment of progress would continue in coming meetings. Members agreed that the addition of this lan- guage was appropriate to acknowledge the Committee’s ongoing deliberations in assessing the economy’s pro- gress toward the Committee’s goals and the implications for the pace of asset purchases. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 27–28, 2021Page 13 “Effective July 29, 2021, the Federal Open Mar- ket Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. • • Increase the System Open Market Ac- count holdings of Treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mort- gage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 bil- lion per month. Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mort- gage-backed securities (CMBS) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. • Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate opera- tion limit of $500 billion; the aggregate op- eration limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $80 billion per day; the per- counterparty limit can be temporarily in- creased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. With progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have shown improvement but have not fully re- covered. Inflation has risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. Overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccina- tions will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remain. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation having run persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moder- ately above 2 percent for some time so that in- flation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and in- flation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. Last December, the Committee indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securi- ties by at least $40 billion per month until sub- stantial further progress has been made toward its maximum employment and price stability goals. Since then, the economy has made pro- gress toward these goals, and the Committee will continue to assess progress in coming meet- ings. These asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative finan- cial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, Randal K. Quarles, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board voted unanimously to establish the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective July 29, 2021.5 The Board also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective July 29, 2021. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, September 21– 22, 2021. The meeting adjourned at 10:35 a.m. on July 28, 2021. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on July 6, 2021, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on June 15–16, 2021. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 5 As announced on June 2, 2021, the Board approved a final rule, effective July 29, amending Regulation D to eliminate ref- erences to an interest on required reserves (IORR) rate and to an interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate and replace them with a single interest on reserve balances (IORB) rate. There- fore, the Board voted on one rate, the IORB rate, at this meet- ing and will continue to do so going forward. The Federal Reg- ister notice, “Regulation D: Reserve Requirements of Deposi- www.federalregis- is available at tory Institutions,” ter.gov/documents/2021/06/04/2021-11758/regulation-d- reserve-requirements-of-depository-institutions _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 27–28, 2021Page 15 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee September 21–22, 2021 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held by videoconference on Tuesday, Septem- ber 21, 2021, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, September 22, 2021, at 9:00 a.m.1 PRESENT: Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Mary C. Daly Charles L. Evans Randal K. Quarles Christopher J. Waller James Bullard, Esther L. George, Naureen Hassan, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Committee Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist David Altig, Brian M. Doyle, Rochelle M. Edge, Sylvain Leduc, Anna Paulson, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board Jon Faust and Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Advisers to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Burcu Duygan- Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, Chiara Scotti, and Nitish R. Sinha, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Marnie Gillis DeBoer, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Susan V. Foley,2 Senior Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board; Diana Hancock and David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Don H. Kim, Edward Nelson, and Annette Vissing- Jørgensen, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Andrew Figura and Elizabeth K. Kiser, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Paul R. Wood, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. (This footnote was corrected on November 26, 2021, to replace an erroneous ref- erence to a “discussion of asset purchases.”) Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Eric C. Engstrom, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Patrick E. McCabe, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Skander Van den Heuvel, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Brian J. Bonis and Etienne Gagnon, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board; Deepa D. Datta,4 Section Chief, Division of International Finance, Board Michele Cavallo, Camelia Minoiu, and Anna Orlik, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Randall A. Williams, Lead Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board David Na, Senior Financial Institution Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Meredith Black, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Michael Dotsey and Joseph W. Gruber, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Kansas City, respectively Anne Baum, Carlos Garriga, Edward S. Knotek II, Giovanni Olivei, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, St. Louis, Cleveland, Boston, and Minneapolis, respectively Matthew D. Raskin,2 Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Alex Richter, Economic Policy Advisor and Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. Keshav Dogra, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments over the period. Domestic finan- cial conditions were little changed, on net, and remained highly accommodative. The spread of the Delta variant of the COVID-19 virus weighed on the near-term growth outlook and median respondents to the Open Market Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers marked down projections for gross domestic product (GDP) growth and revised up projections for inflation this year. None- theless, expectations for the trajectory of growth beyond 2021 were little changed. Implied forward inflation compensation two to four years ahead based on Treas- ury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) increased mod- estly over the intermeeting period. Regarding the outlook for monetary policy, market par- ticipants noted policymaker communications suggesting that tapering of asset purchases could begin this year and end by mid-2022. Around half of respondents to the Desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market partici- pants viewed December as the most likely timing of the first reduction in the net pace of purchases, although re- spondents also attached significant probability to the first reduction coming in November. Median expecta- tions for the pace of net purchases were consistent with a gradual tapering of net purchases being completed in July of next year, about one to two months earlier than in the previous surveys. Expectations for the target fed- eral funds rate based on survey responses and interest rate futures moved up slightly since the previous meet- ing. Several central banks announced reductions in the pace of their asset purchase programs or eventual plans for their balance sheets once asset purchases had been com- pleted. These announcements were broadly in line with market participants’ expectations and elicited only a modest reaction in financial markets. In Latin America and emerging Europe, some central banks recently tight- ened policy to address rising inflation pressures. Inves- tors remained focused on other vulnerabilities in emerg- ing markets, and concerns had grown recently about the possible implications of developments in China. The manager turned next to a discussion of money mar- kets and Federal Reserve operations. Domestic funding 4 Attended the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ conditions were stable over the period. The federal funds rate edged lower amid ongoing increases in re- serves, but it remained well within the target range; the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) was steady at 5 basis points. Participation in the overnight reverse re- purchase agreement (ON RRP) facility increased to an average of just over $1 trillion over the period, driven primarily by increased usage by government money mar- ket funds. Market participants were attentive over the period to negotiations on the debt limit. Yields on Treasury bills maturing in mid-October to mid-Novem- ber had become modestly elevated as investors reduced exposures to securities that could be at risk for delayed payments. Market participants noted information in the public domain about measures the Federal Reserve and the Treasury could take around a debt limit event. They pointed, in particular, to the October 2013 FOMC meet- ing minutes, which highlighted that the Federal Reserve would use normal procedures in its operations, both as the debt limit nears and in the event of a delayed pay- ment. Market participants also focused on a 2013 report by the Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG), which outlined a process that could be used to delay principal payments on Treasury securities by rolling forward the operational maturity date in order to maintain the ability to transfer such securities over Fedwire®. The TMPG report noted that such a procedure would help support ongoing functioning of markets for securities with de- layed payments. This would maintain their eligibility in open market operations under normal procedures. Nev- ertheless, market participants emphasized that, even with these procedures, a delayed payment would create severe and broad-based market disruption. In light of increased usage of the ON RRP facility and the potential for continued downward pressure on short-term interest rates over the near term, the manager next discussed a staff proposal to increase the per- counterparty limit for the ON RRP facility to $160 bil- lion. Staff analysis suggested that the proposed increase was likely to be sufficient to support effective policy im- plementation for most foreseeable circumstances. The manager provided a brief update on the new repur- chase agreement (repo) facilities that the Committee had announced following its meeting in July. The Desk had been working to onboard depository institutions as ad- ditional counterparties for the standing repo facility. In addition, a number of foreign central banks had ex- pressed intent to establish access to the Foreign and In- ternational Monetary Authority Repo Facility. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the Septem- ber 21–22 meeting suggested that U.S. real GDP was in- creasing in the third quarter at a slower pace than in the second quarter of the year. The pace of improvement in labor market conditions had remained very rapid in July but slowed sharply in August. Consumer price inflation in June and July—as measured by the 12-month percent- age change in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index—was elevated. Total nonfarm payroll employment increased sharply in July but rose much less rapidly in August, with job gains in the leisure and hospitality sector slowing to zero. In addition, state and local government employment was reported to have fallen in August, though abnormal sea- sonal swings had likely distorted recent readings for this sector. As of August, total payroll employment had re- traced three-fourths of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. The unemployment rate had declined from 5.9 percent in June to 5.2 percent in August; although the unemployment rates for African Americans and His- panics had also declined, on net, over this period, both rates remained well above the national average. The la- bor force participation rate edged up, on net, and the employment-to-population (EPOP) ratio rose further in July and August. Private-sector job openings, as meas- ured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, increased further in July and continued to suggest that labor demand was extraordinarily high. Initial claims for regular state unemployment insurance remained near the pandemic-period low that had been reached in early Sep- tember but were still somewhat elevated relative to pre- pandemic levels. Weekly estimates of private-sector pay- rolls constructed by the Board’s staff using data pro- vided by the payroll processor ADP that were available through early September pointed to a modest pickup in the pace of private employment gains relative to August. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose strongly in July and August, with gains that were widespread across industries. Recent monthly increases in average hourly earnings appeared to reflect a combination of continued strong labor demand and increased difficul- ties in hiring. A staff measure of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the ADP data had also pointed to strong wage growth, with a pace in August Minutes of the Meeting of September 21–22, 2021Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ that was well above the growth rates seen before the pandemic. By contrast, the Wage Growth Tracker meas- ure constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta had not shown a similar pickup. The employment cost index of hourly compensation in the private sector, which also includes benefit costs, rose at an annual rate of 3.6 percent over the 6 months ending in June, 1 per- centage point faster than the 12-month change posted in December 2020. Inflation, as measured by either the PCE price index or the consumer price index (CPI), had been boosted by a surge in demand as the economy reopened further, along with the effects of production bottlenecks and supply constraints. Total PCE price inflation was 4.2 percent over the 12 months ending in July, and core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 3.6 percent over the 12 months ending in July. In contrast, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE inflation con- structed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 2.0 percent in July. In August, the 12-month change in the CPI was 5.3 percent, while the core CPI rose 4.0 per- cent over the same period. In the third quarter of 2021, the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, was little changed relative to the second quarter and was near its average over the decade before the pandemic. Although real PCE declined in July, the components of retail sales used to estimate PCE rose strongly in August, returning to levels seen in the spring. However, con- cerns about the course of the pandemic appeared to be weighing on consumer services spending, as available in- dicators pointed to a slowing in demand for services sen- sitive to social distancing. In addition, measures of con- sumer confidence had moved lower in August. Demand for housing appeared to have remained very strong, but incoming data suggested that materials shortages and a lack of developed lots for construction were restraining residential building activity. Available indicators suggested that growth in business fixed investment was slowing somewhat in the third quarter as supply bottlenecks—particularly for motor vehicles—weighed on business equipment spending. Manufacturing output rose strongly in July and ticked up further in August. In August, activity in the oil and gas sector and production of petrochemicals had been held down by shutdowns related to Hurricane Ida. Supply chain issues faced by a number of other industries also continued to be a drag on overall factory output. Total real government purchases appeared to be increas- ing in the third quarter after having moved lower in the second quarter. Available data suggested that federal nondefense purchases were declining sharply in the third quarter but that robust gains in real state and local pur- chases were offsetting this decline. The U.S. international trade deficit remained high in July. After rising in June, real goods imports fell back in July, held down by a sizable decline in consumer goods imports, but the levels of consumer and total goods im- ports remained well above pre-COVID-19 levels. Real goods exports edged up in July and were close to pre- pandemic levels. Bottlenecks in the global semiconduc- tor industry continued to weigh on exports and imports of automotive products, and shipping congestion con- tinued to restrain trade overall. Exports and imports of services rose again in July, but they remained low relative to pre-pandemic levels, largely because international travel was still depressed. In the advanced foreign economies (AFEs), where high vaccination rates had increased resilience to COVID-19 outbreaks, incoming data were consistent with economic growth in the third quarter at a slightly faster pace than in the second quarter. With the economic reopening un- der way, purchasing managers indexes for both manu- facturing and services remained strong in Europe and Canada. Conversely, in emerging market economies (EMEs)—especially in Southeast Asia, where vaccina- tion rates were lower—a global resurgence in COVID- 19 infections due to the Delta variant led to renewals of public health restrictions. These restrictions weakened retail sales and contributed to labor shortages and trans- portation congestion, disrupting global supply chains. Inflation abroad was elevated, reflecting reversals of price declines early in the pandemic, past increases in en- ergy and commodity prices, upward pressures from sup- ply bottlenecks, and past exchange rate depreciations in some EMEs. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Financial market prices were little changed over the in- termeeting period. Concerns over the period about the effects of COVID-19 developments on economic per- formance and, late in the period, about a heavily in- debted Chinese property developer appeared to have only marginal net effects on financial asset prices. The incoming domestic economic data were generally viewed as mixed. Yields on Treasury securities of intermediate maturities increased modestly, the market-implied path of the federal funds rate steepened, domestic equity prices were unchanged, and speculative-grade corporate Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ bond spreads narrowed modestly. Short-term funding markets were stable. Market-based financing conditions were robust, and credit availability improved for riskier borrowers. Yields on intermediate-maturity Treasury securities in- creased modestly, on net, amid mixed news on economic activity and the pandemic, and slightly less-accommoda- tive-than-expected communications. July FOMC Measures of inflation compensation declined modestly, on net. The market-implied level of the effective federal funds rate for the ends of 2023 and 2024 rose 12 and 17 basis points, respectively. Broad stock market prices were about unchanged, on net, over the intermeeting period. Early in the period, concerns over the Delta variant were a headwind for stock prices. Prices recovered following the FDA’s first full approval of a COVID-19 vaccine and signs that the Delta variant surge was starting to abate. Over the in- termeeting period, spreads of yields on speculative-grade corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed slightly, on net. Invest- ment-grade corporate bond spreads were little changed, on net, and spreads of municipal bond indexes increased slightly but remained well below pre-pandemic levels. On September 20, stock market prices fell notably and speculative-grade yield spreads widened amid rising con- cerns about the creditworthiness of a Chinese property developer, but these moves were mostly reversed during the following day, particularly in the stock market. Short-term funding markets were stable over the inter- meeting period. The effective federal funds rate de- clined slightly, from 10 basis points at the beginning of the period to 8 basis points at the end, while the SOFR remained at 5 basis points throughout the period. Assets under management (AUM) of government money mar- ket mutual funds increased modestly to near all-time highs. Treasury bill supply continued to decline with the reinstatement of the debt ceiling. Higher AUM together with declining Treasury bill supply led government money market mutual funds to increase their participa- tion at the Federal Reserve’s ON RRP facility. Partici- pation in ON RRP operations increased from an average of $808 billion over the previous intermeeting period to $1.08 trillion. Foreign asset prices fluctuated moderately over the in- termeeting period as market participants continued to assess the effect of the Delta variant on global growth and inflation. Concerns about a potential default by a heavily indebted Chinese property developer and risks of a downturn in the Chinese real estate sector intensi- fied later in the period, but effects on broader financial markets were limited. On balance, major foreign equity indexes were mixed, the broad dollar appreciated a touch, and sovereign yields in most major AFEs in- creased moderately. In the euro area and the United Kingdom, higher-than-expected inflation data contrib- uted to the rise in yields and inflation compensation measures. In domestic credit markets, large nonfinancial firms had ample access to market-based financing as market par- ticipants appeared confident in the domestic corporate credit outlook. After accounting for the seasonal sum- mer lull in activity, gross corporate bond issuance re- mained solid in July and August. Leveraged loan issu- ance was also strong in July and August. Equity funding raised through traditional initial public offerings re- mained robust over the summer, while equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies re- mained at the subdued levels seen in recent months. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans declined notably through August, amid ongoing forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans. Excluding PPP loans, C&I loan balances were estimated to have been largely unchanged between June and July. The credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations re- mained strong with a positive outlook. The volume of credit rating upgrades for nonfinancial bonds outpaced downgrades noticeably in July and August. Trailing de- fault rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans re- mained low, as did market indicators of future default expectations. In the municipal bond market, financing conditions re- mained accommodative. Issuance of municipal debt was strong in July and August and indicators of credit quality of municipal debt remained healthy, though municipal bond impairments—that is, credit events that are less se- vere than payment defaults—remained elevated in Au- gust. These impairments were concentrated in the re- tirement and assisted living sector and represent a very small fraction of the municipal market. Survey-based indicators suggest small business owners, especially from COVID-sensitive sectors that include lodging and food services, arts, entertainment and recre- ation, and educational services, became more pessimistic about their financial prospects, largely because of a worsening of near-term expectations for sales and gen- eral business conditions. Small business loan origina- tions were above pre-pandemic levels in June and July, Minutes of the Meeting of September 21–22, 2021Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ but increased concerns about the Delta variant de- pressed loan demand in August. Financing conditions in commercial real estate (CRE) improved over the intermeeting period amid increasing CRE property prices. CRE loan growth at banks strengthened and issuance of commercial mortgage- backed securities (CMBS) remained robust over the summer. Spreads of agency CMBS were generally at or below pre-pandemic levels. Strong investor appetite for CMBS was supported by falling delinquency rates on mortgages, although delinquency rates remained ele- vated for CMBS backed by hotel and retail properties. Financing remained limited for the hard-hit hotel sector. In the residential mortgage market, financing conditions remained accommodative particularly for borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. Mortgage rates increased slightly over the intermeeting period but remained very low by historical standards. Credit avail- ability continued to improve, especially for jumbo loans and lower-score Federal Housing Administration bor- rowers. Indicators of mortgage originations for home- purchases and refinancing were solid through August. The share of mortgages in forbearance declined further in July and August. Financing conditions for consumer credit remained ac- commodative for most borrowers, especially those with stronger credit scores. Consumer credit and the credit card market expanded at a strong pace in June before stepping down somewhat in July. Conditions for nonprime consumers in the credit card market eased from tight levels. Auto loan growth slowed in June and July from its brisk pace in May. Conditions in the asset- backed securities market were robust over the intermeet- ing period. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the September FOMC meeting was broadly similar to the July projection. In the second half of 2021, supply constraints were expected to resolve more slowly than previously assumed; in addition, the recent rise in COVID-19 cases was viewed as likely to exert a larger amount of restraint on consumer spending, hiring, and labor supply than previously anticipated. Even so, real GDP was expected to post a sizable gain over the second half of 2021 and over the year as a whole, resulting in a correspondingly large decline in the unemployment rate. In 2022, GDP was expected to rise more slowly than in 2021 but at a still-solid pace, supported by the continued reopening of the economy and an easing of supply con- straints. With the boost from these factors fading, real GDP growth was projected to step down noticeably in 2023 and to be roughly equal to potential output growth in 2023 and 2024. However, the level of real GDP was expected to remain well above potential throughout the projection period, resulting in a decline in the unemploy- ment rate to historically low levels. The staff’s near-term outlook for inflation was revised up further in response to incoming data, but the staff continued to expect that this year’s rise in inflation would prove to be transitory. The 12-month change in total and core PCE prices was well above 2 percent in July, and available data suggested that PCE price infla- tion had remained high in August. The staff interpreted recent inflation data as indicating that supply constraints were putting a larger amount of upward pressure on prices than previously anticipated; relative to the July projection, these supply constraints were also expected to take longer to resolve. As a result, the 12-month change in PCE prices was projected to hold roughly steady over the remainder of 2021 and to end the year well above 2 percent. Over the following year, the boost to consumer prices caused by supply issues was expected to partly reverse and import prices were expected to de- celerate sharply. PCE price inflation was therefore ex- pected to step down to a little below 2 percent in 2022; thereafter, additional increases in resource utilization were expected to cause it to gradually edge higher and to reach 2 percent in 2024. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside. In particular, the future course of the pan- demic was seen as an important source of downside risk. The staff also continued to judge that the risks around the inflation projection were tilted to the upside, with the possibility of more severe and persistent supply issues viewed as especially salient. In addition, the staff pointed to a risk that longer-run inflation expectations would move appreciably higher and lead to persistently elevated inflation. Participants’ Views on Current Economic Condi- tions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2021 through 2024 and over the longer run based on their individual assessments of ap- propriate monetary policy, including the path of the fed- eral funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ variable would be expected to converge, over time, un- der appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Eco- nomic Projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. In their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that, with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and em- ployment had continued to strengthen. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months, but the rise in COVID-19 cases had slowed their recovery. Inflation was elevated, largely re- flecting transitory factors. Overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Participants noted that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. Participants observed that economic activity had contin- ued to expand in recent months, though at a less rapid pace than in the first half of the year. They marked down their projections of real GDP growth for the year, point- ing to a reassessment of the severity and likely duration of supply constraints or of the effects of the spread of the Delta variant on the economy. Still, participants foresaw rapid growth this year, and several highlighted that the economy had shown resilience in the face of the recent wave of infections. In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that consumer spending had decelerated in recent months after expanding at a very rapid pace in the first half of the year. The spread of the Delta variant was weighing on spending for some consumer services, and low inventories and high prices due to supply constraints were restraining spending on many goods, most notably motor vehicles. Nonetheless, participants expected the accumulated stock of savings, the release of pent-up de- mand, and progress on vaccinations to continue to sup- port household spending in coming months. Partici- pants noted that residential construction had been re- strained by shortages of materials and other inputs and that home sales had been held back by limited supplies of available homes. With respect to the business sector, participants ob- served that firms in a number of industries were facing challenges keeping up with strong demand due to wide- spread supply chain bottlenecks as well as labor short- ages. Some participants commented that the recent global wave of COVID-19 infections and associated business shutdowns were exacerbating or prolonging these problems. The supply chain bottlenecks were cre- ating challenges for a number of manufacturers; the problems were seen as especially acute for the motor ve- hicle industry, where the shortages of semiconductor chips had sharply curtailed production. Retail industries were also facing various bottlenecks, including those stemming from port congestion and delays in ground transportation. Participants noted that their District contacts generally did not expect these bottlenecks to be fully resolved until sometime next year or even later. A couple of participants noted that inventories-to-sales ra- tios were at or near record-low levels in many industries, and the need to rebuild them would boost business in- vestment going forward. Participants also discussed the developments in oil, gasoline, and agricultural sectors. A couple of participants pointed out that Hurricane Ida significantly affected the oil and gas industries, curtailing U.S. offshore production at a time of low inventories. A couple of other participants noted that elevated crop prices were continuing to boost income in the agricul- tural sector. Participants noted that labor market conditions had con- tinued to improve in recent months. The unemploy- ment rate declined further to 5.2 percent in August, and a few participants noted a further pickup in recent months in the level of activity indicator in the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Labor Market Conditions Indicators. After a rapid pace of almost 1 million per month in June and July, job gains slowed to 235,000 in August as the resurgence of COVID-19 cases weighed on employment in high-contact service sectors, particu- larly in the leisure and hospitality sector. Meanwhile, the labor force participation rate was little changed, remain- ing at a lower level than its pre-pandemic values. Some participants noted that the increase in labor force partic- ipation that they had expected had not yet materialized in the wake of the reopening of schools and the expira- tion of the extended unemployment benefits, and that this likely reflected in part concerns about the resurgence of the virus, childcare challenges, and the uncertainties generated by ongoing disruptions to in-person school- ing. Participants expected the labor market to continue to improve in coming months. Several participants in- dicated that a rise in the labor force participation rate might lag the improvements in other indicators such as the unemployment rate—a pattern consistent with past business cycle recoveries. Participants expressed a range Minutes of the Meeting of September 21–22, 2021Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ of views regarding the extent to which they expected the labor force participation rate and the EPOP ratio would move back to their pre-pandemic levels. Various partic- ipants suggested that a complete return to pre-pandemic conditions was unlikely, as the pandemic had prompted reductions in the workforce that were likely to persist, including a large number of retirements and other depar- tures from the labor force. A number of others, how- ever, assessed that once the COVID-related concerns that were currently weighing on labor force participation passed, the participation rate and the EPOP ratio could return to, or even exceed, the pre-pandemic levels. Some participants remarked that the labor market recov- ery continued to be uneven across demographic and in- come groups and across sectors, with the recovery being particularly slow for women with young children and people with lower incomes. Participants noted that their District contacts had broadly reported having difficulty hiring workers. The labor shortages were causing firms to reduce hours and scale back production while also leading employers to provide incentives to attract and retain workers, includ- ing wage increases and signing and retention bonuses. The rate of nominal wage growth had been robust in re- cent data; for example, average hourly earnings were up 4.9 percent at an annualized rate over the past six months. In their discussion of inflation, participants observed that the inflation rate was elevated, and they expected that it would likely remain so in coming months before moderating. Participants marked up their inflation pro- jections, as they assessed that supply constraints in prod- uct and labor markets were larger and likely to be longer lasting than previously anticipated. Some participants expressed concerns that elevated rates of inflation could feed through into longer-term inflation expectations of households and businesses or saw recent inflation data as suggestive of broader inflation pressures. Several other participants pointed out that the largest contribu- tors to the recent elevated measures of inflation were a handful of COVID-related, pandemic-sensitive catego- ries in which specific, identifiable bottlenecks were at play. This observation suggested that the upward pres- sure on prices would abate as the COVID-related de- mand and supply imbalances subsided. These partici- pants noted that prices in some of those categories showed signs of stabilizing or even turned down of late. Many participants pointed out that the owners’ equiva- lent rent component of price indexes should be moni- tored carefully, as rising home prices could lead to up- ward pressure on rents. A few participants noted that there was not yet evidence that robust wage growth was exerting upward pressure on prices to a significant de- gree, but also that the possibility merited close monitor- ing. In their comments on inflation expectations, several par- ticipants observed that measures of longer-term infla- tion expectations, including TIPS- and survey-based measures, had remained in ranges that were viewed as broadly consistent with the Committee’s longer-run in- flation goal, or that the distribution across households of longer-term expected inflation had remained stable over the past two years. Many participants noted the substantial rise in one- and three-year measures of infla- tion expectations in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations or in the one- year measure in the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers. A few participants remarked that these sur- vey measures tended to be sensitive to movements in ac- tual inflation, or that the recent rise was consistent with previous historical relationships between such measures and actual inflation. In discussing the uncertainty and risks associated with the economic outlook, participants noted that uncer- tainty remained high. A number of participants judged that the uncertain course of the virus, supply chain dis- ruptions, and labor shortages complicated the task of in- terpreting incoming economic data and assessing pro- gress toward the Committee’s goals. Participants gener- ally saw the risks to the outlook for economic activity as broadly balanced. Uncertainty around the course of the virus, the resolution of supply constraints, and fiscal measures were cited as presenting both upside and downside risks. In addition, some participants men- tioned the risks associated with high asset valuations in the United States and abroad, and a number of partici- pants commented on the importance of resolving the is- sues involving the federal government budget and debt ceiling in a timely manner. Most participants saw infla- tion risks as weighted to the upside because of concerns that supply disruptions and labor shortages might last longer and might have larger or more persistent effects on prices and wages than they currently assumed. A few participants commented that there were also some downside risks for inflation, as the factors that had held inflation down over the previous long expansion were likely still in place. In their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the Federal Reserve’s commit- ment to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ economy during this challenging time, thereby promot- ing the Committee’s statutory goals of maximum em- ployment and price stability. Participants judged that the current stance of monetary policy remained appropriate to promote maximum employment as well as to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time and longer- term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent. Participants also reiterated that the existing outcome-based guidance implied that the paths of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet would depend on actual progress toward reaching the Committee’s maximum-employment and inflation goals. Participants resumed their discussions on the progress made toward the Committee’s goals since December 2020, when the Committee adopted its guidance regard- ing asset purchases and indicated that purchases would continue at their current pace until substantial further progress had been made toward the Committee’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. These pur- chases had been a critical part of the Federal Reserve’s efforts to foster smooth financial market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby sup- porting the flow of credit to households and businesses as well as the economic recovery. Most participants re- marked that the standard of “substantial further pro- gress” had been met with regard to the Committee’s price-stability goal or that it was likely to be met soon. With regard to the Committee’s maximum-employment goal, participants considered the cumulative degree of improvement in the labor market since December 2020. In doing so, participants cited the progress recorded in a number of individual series, including, among others, the employment-to-population ratio, the unemployment rate, claims for unemployment insurance, job openings, nominal wage growth, and increases in payrolls, as well as in summary measures of the labor situation. Some participants observed that progress on labor force par- ticipation was lagging. Many participants noted that al- though the economic recovery had slowed recently and the August increase in payrolls had fallen short of expec- tations, the labor market had continued to show im- provement since the Committee’s previous meeting. A number of participants assessed that the standard of substantial further progress toward the goal of maxi- mum employment had not yet been attained but that, if the economy proceeded roughly as they anticipated, it may soon be reached. On the basis of the cumulative performance of the labor market since December 2020, a number of other participants indicated that they be- lieved that the test of “substantial further progress” to- ward maximum employment had been met. Some of these participants also suggested that labor supply con- straints were the main impediments to further improve- ment in labor market conditions rather than lack of de- mand. They noted that adding monetary policy accom- modation at this time would not address such con- straints or that the costs of continuing asset purchases might be beginning to exceed their benefits. All partici- pants agreed that it would be appropriate for the current meeting’s postmeeting statement to relay the Commit- tee’s judgment that, if progress continued broadly as ex- pected, a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. Participants also expressed their views on how slowing in the pace of purchases might proceed. In particular, participants commented on an illustrative path, devel- oped by the staff and reflecting participants’ discussions at the Committee’s July meeting, that gave the speed and composition associated with a tapering of asset pur- chases. The illustrative tapering path was designed to be simple to communicate and entailed a gradual reduction in the pace of net asset purchases that, if begun later this year, would lead the Federal Reserve to end purchases around the middle of next year. The path featured monthly reductions in the pace of asset purchases, by $10 billion in the case of Treasury securities and $5 bil- lion in the case of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Participants generally commented that the illus- trative path provided a straightforward and appropriate template that policymakers might follow, and a couple of participants observed that giving advance notice to the general public of a plan along these lines may reduce the risk of an adverse market reaction to a moderation in asset purchases. Participants noted that, in keeping with the outcome-based standard for initiating a tapering of asset purchases, the Committee could adjust the pace of the moderation of its purchases if economic develop- ments were to differ substantially from what they ex- pected. Several participants indicated that they preferred to proceed with a more rapid moderation of purchases than described in the illustrative examples. No decision to proceed with a moderation of asset pur- chases was made at the meeting, but participants gener- ally assessed that, provided that the economic recovery remained broadly on track, a gradual tapering process that concluded around the middle of next year would likely be appropriate. Participants noted that if a deci- sion to begin tapering purchases occurred at the next meeting, the process of tapering could commence with the monthly purchase calendars beginning in either mid- November or mid-December. Minutes of the Meeting of September 21–22, 2021Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Many participants remarked upon risk-management considerations and the way in which these figured into their thinking on asset purchases and the appropriate policy stance. A number of downside risks to the eco- nomic outlook were cited, including a potential tighten- ing of financial conditions, the possibility that another rise in COVID-19 cases would slow the economic re- covery by more than expected, and the prospect that fis- cal policy could become a source of economic head- winds as the effects of previous support measures re- ceded. Upside risks to the economic outlook included the possibility that there would be additional expansion- ary fiscal actions or that consumer spending would rise by more than expected as households reduced the large volume of savings that they had accumulated during the pandemic. With regard to inflation, upside risks cited included the possibility that elevated levels of inflation would continue for longer than expected, especially if la- bor and other supply shortages proved more persistent than currently anticipated, or that longer-term inflation expectations might move above levels consistent with the Committee’s longer-term inflation objective of 2 percent. Downside risks to inflation included the pos- sibility of a decline in inflation expectations that might occur if the public misconstrued the Federal Reserve’s reaction function as less accommodative than it actually was. Several participants expressed concern that the high degree of accommodation being provided by mon- etary policy, including through continued asset pur- chases, could increase risks to financial stability. Participants reaffirmed that the Committee’s “substan- tial further progress” standard regarding its asset pur- chases was distinct from the criteria given in its forward guidance on the federal funds rate and that a policy shift toward a moderation of asset purchases provided no di- rect signal about its interest rate policy. Rather, the Committee had articulated a different, and more strin- gent, test concerning the conditions that would need to be met before it started raising the target range for the federal funds rate. Various participants stressed that economic conditions were likely to justify keeping the rate at or near its lower bound over the next couple of years. In addition to noting that the economy was still well below maximum employment, several of these par- ticipants suggested that there would likely be sustained downward pressure on inflation in the years ahead. These participants stated that, in such circumstances, a major challenge facing policymakers—especially in the presence of the effective lower bound on the federal funds rate—was to maintain a policy stance sufficiently accommodative to keep average inflation at 2 percent and thereby bolster the credibility of the Committee’s new policy framework, facilitating the achievement of both maximum employment and price stability. In con- trast, a number of participants raised the possibility of beginning to increase the target range by the end of next year because they expected that the labor market and in- flation outcomes specified in the Committee’s guidance on the federal funds rate might be achieved by that time; some of these participants saw inflation as likely to re- main elevated in 2022 with risks to the upside. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. They noted that the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but that the rise in COVID-19 cases had slowed their recovery. In- flation was elevated, largely reflecting transitory factors. Overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the econ- omy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and busi- nesses. Members also acknowledged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the vi- rus. Progress on vaccinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the econ- omy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was commit- ted to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. All members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the Com- mittee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and in- flation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, and with inflation having run persistently below this longer- run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expecta- tions remain well anchored at 2 percent. Members ex- pected to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until those outcomes were achieved. All members agreed to keep the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range un- til labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employ- ment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. Last De- cember, the Committee indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ $80 billion per month and of agency MBS by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward its maximum employment and price stability goals. The members commented that, since then, the economy had made progress toward these goals and that, if progress continued broadly as ex- pected, a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. They judged that these asset pur- chases would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby sup- porting the flow of credit to households and businesses. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Members also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. Members agreed that the postmeeting statement should acknowledge the slowing of the economic recovery, as indicated in data received since the July meeting, as well as ongoing elevated inflation readings. In light of these developments, they agreed that the Committee should indicate that the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but that the rise in COVID-19 cases had slowed their recovery, and they also concurred that it would be appropriate to characterize inflation as being “elevated” in place of stating that inflation had “risen.” Members further decided to add to the postmeeting statement an indication that if progress toward the maximum-employ- ment and price-stability goals continued broadly as ex- pected, the Committee judged that a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. Mem- bers agreed that the addition of this language was an ap- propriate means of acknowledging that, in the near fu- ture, the Committee would likely assess that the standard for reducing the pace of net asset purchases had been met. With regard to the directive to the Desk, members agreed that the directive should incorporate the pro- posed increase in the per-counterparty limit for the ON RRP facility to $160 billion. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective September 23, 2021, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to:  Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent.   Increase the System Open Market Account holdings of Treasury securities by $80 bil- lion per month and of agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS) by $40 billion per month. Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgage- backed securities (CMBS) as needed to sus- tain smooth functioning of markets for these securities.  Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate opera- tion limit of $500 billion; the aggregate op- eration limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per- counterparty limit can be temporarily in- creased at the discretion of the Chair.  Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS.  Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: Minutes of the Meeting of September 21–22, 2021Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. With progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months, but the rise in COVID-19 cases has slowed their recovery. In- flation is elevated, largely reflecting transitory factors. Overall financial conditions remain ac- commodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccina- tions will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remain. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation having run persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moder- ately above 2 percent for some time so that in- flation averages 2 percent over time and longer‑term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and in- flation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. Last December, the Committee indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage‑backed securi- ties by at least $40 billion per month until sub- stantial further progress has been made toward its maximum employment and price stability goals. Since then, the economy has made pro- gress toward these goals. If progress continues broadly as expected, the Committee judges that a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. These asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accom- modative financial conditions, thereby support- ing the flow of credit to households and busi- nesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, Randal K. Quarles, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective Sep- tember 23, 2021. The Board also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the level of 0.25 percent, effective Septem- existing ber 23, 2021. Following the FOMC policy vote, the Chair emphasized that maintaining the public trust is absolutely essential for the work of the Federal Reserve. In light of recent questions regarding the financial transactions of senior officials, the Chair indicated that the staff would conduct a thorough review of the Federal Reserve’s current rules and regulations regarding the financial holdings and practices of Federal Reserve officials. This deliberate and thoughtful review will focus on strengthening Fed- eral Reserve rules and standards in ways that will help guard against even the appearance of conflicts of interest or any other improprieties. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, November 2– 3, 2021. The meeting adjourned at 10:45 a.m. on Sep- tember 22, 2021. Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Notation Vote By notation vote completed on August 17, 2021, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 27–28, 2021. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Minutes of the Meeting of September 21–22, 2021Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee November 2–3, 2021 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, November 2, 2021, at 1:00 p.m. and contin- ued on Wednesday, November 3, 2021, at 9:00 a.m.1 Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Attendance Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Mary C. Daly Charles L. Evans Randal K. Quarles Christopher J. Waller James Bullard, Esther L. George, Naureen Hassan, Loretta J. Mester, and Kenneth C. Montgomery, Alternate Members of the Committee Patrick Harker and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively Meredith Black, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Board Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Re- search and Statistics, Board; Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board Jon Faust and Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Advisers to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Burcu Duygan- Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, Chiara Scotti, and Nitish R. Sinha, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board David López-Salido, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Edward Nelson and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Shaghil Ahmed, Brian M. Doyle, Rochelle M. Edge, Anna Paulson, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Re- search and Statistics, Board; Christopher J. Gust, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Board; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Associate Director, Di- vision of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Edward S. Prescott, Senior Economic and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Karel Mertens, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Skander Van den Heuvel, Deputy Associate Director, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Division of Financial Stability, Board Gianni Amisano, Byron Lutz, and Raven Molloy, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Brian J. Bonis, Giovanni Favara, and Dan Li, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Randall A. Williams, Group Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Michele Cavallo, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Callum Jones and Arsenios Skaperdas, Senior Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board Isaiah C. Ahn, Senior Staff Assistant, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Ron Feldman, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Joseph W. Gruber and Geoffrey Tootell, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Boston, respectively Anne Baum, Carlos Garriga, Paolo A. Pesenti, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, St. Louis, New York, and Minneapolis, respectively Satyajit Chatterjee and Alexander L. Wolman, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Richmond, respectively 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. Mark Spiegel, Senior Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Brent Meyer, Policy Advisor and Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Discussion of Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a discussion of global finan- cial markets. Sovereign yields rose sharply across many advanced economies with much of the increase concen- trated in measures of inflation compensation. In the United States, the five-year measure of inflation com- pensation based on Treasury Inflation Protected Securi- ties (TIPS) rose by around 45 basis points. Far forward measures of inflation compensation also rose, but by modest amounts. In the Open Market Desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants, the median forecast for headline PCE inflation in 2021 was revised up notably. Median forecasts beyond 2021move up by less, although the average of the probabilities reported by survey respondents placed on higher inflation out- comes at these horizons increased modestly. Policy sensitive rates increased across most advanced economies. The central banks of Norway and New Zea- land raised their policy rates early in the period, and pol- icy communications from the Bank of England and the Bank of Canada pointed to the potential for earlier pol- icy firming than had been expected, contributing to the upward movement of global rates. The Reserve Bank of Australia ended its yield target for the April 2024 gov- ernment bond. That central bank signaled that condi- tions for raising the policy rate could be met in 2023 but were unlikely to be achieved in the earlier timeframe im- plied by market pricing. Some European Central Bank communications also suggested that market rates were likely not consistent with the outlook for policy. In the United States, the market-implied path of the fed- eral funds rate rose, implying an earlier date for raising the target range for the federal funds rate and a faster pace of rate hikes than was the case in September. Op- tion-implied volatility on short-dated interest rates in- creased, reportedly reflecting greater uncertainty over Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the path of the federal funds rate. Desk survey re- sponses also indicated expectations for an earlier in- crease in the target range, although the median respond- ent’s modal expectation shifted by less than market pric- ing. The median survey respondent’s modal expectation for the federal funds rate at the end of 2025 was little changed suggesting that investors had not revised their expectations for the cumulative extent of policy firming over the next four years. Expectations for a reduction in the pace of net asset purchases coalesced further, and most survey respondents expected the tapering of asset purchases to start with the November purchase schedule with monthly reductions of $10 billion and $5 billion in Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securi- ties (MBS), respectively. Over the intermeeting period, U.S. equity indexes rose and the one-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—fell to post-pandemic lows. Con- tinued strong earnings underpinned the rise in equity prices, with firms posting profits near historical highs. Despite signs of robust risk appetite, market participants continued to note prominent risks to the outlook, in- cluding ongoing challenges in the Chinese property sec- tor. Turning to Desk operations, the manager noted that, should the Committee decide to announce a reduction in the pace of net asset purchases at this meeting, the Desk would issue a monthly purchase schedule on No- vember 12 reflecting this change. The mid-December purchase schedule, to be released just before the next FOMC meeting, would reflect additional reductions of the same size. Treasury securities and agency MBS would continue to be purchased across sectors and cou- pons consistent with current practice. If similar reductions in the net purchase pace were im- plemented in subsequent months, the System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio would peak around next June at about $8.5 trillion. In terms of composition, Treasury securities and agency MBS would constitute roughly 70 percent and 30 percent of the SOMA port- folio, respectively—roughly in line with the shares of Treasury securities and agency MBS in the total stock of these securities outstanding—and the SOMA portfolio would be more heavily weighted toward Treasury secu- rities than after the conclusion of the third large-scale asset purchase program (LSAP 3) following the global financial crisis. The maturity composition of SOMA Treasury coupon holdings would also be fairly close to that of the outstanding universe of Treasury securities, and the weighted average maturity would be shorter than after LSAP 3. Turning to money market developments, the manager noted that the transition away from LIBOR (London In- terbank Offered Rate) had gained momentum with a pick-up in the interdealer trading volume of Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) derivatives; that said, much remained to be done to complete the LIBOR tran- sition. Market participants were attentive to some tem- porary downward pressure on the SOFR over the pe- riod. This softness appeared to be the result of technical factors and was observed primarily in centrally cleared repurchase agreement markets. The Federal Reserve’s administered rates—the interest on reserve balances rate and the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) rate—continued to support effective interest rate control and, outside of month- and quarter-end, the fed- eral funds rate remained stable over the period. Regarding the debt ceiling, the short-term resolution reached in October increased the debt limit by $480 bil- lion. Market participants’ estimates of the new date when the Treasury would exhaust its extraordinary measures and cash balance were wide-ranging but some estimates suggested the date might be as early as mid- December. Most market participants anticipated that a resolution to the debt ceiling would again be reached without a delayed payment on maturing Treasury secu- rities although uncertainty about the debt ceiling resolu- tion remained a source of concern in financial markets. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the Novem- ber 2–3 meeting suggested that U.S. real GDP growth had slowed markedly in the third quarter after the first half’s rapid pace. Labor market conditions continued to improve in September, though employment growth was slower than in recent months. Consumer price inflation in September—as measured by the 12-month percent- age change in the PCE price index—was elevated. Growth in total nonfarm payroll employment slowed further in September, held down by a decline in state and local government employment. As of September, total payroll employment had retraced three-fourths of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. The unem- ployment rate declined from 5.2 percent in August to _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 2–3, 2021Page 3 4.8 percent in September; the unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics also declined over this period, but both rates remained well above the national average. The labor force participation rate edged lower in September, and the employment-to-population ratio moved up. Private-sector job openings, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, stepped down in August but remained well above pre-pandemic levels. Initial claims for regular state unemployment in- surance moved lower through late October and were ap- proaching the levels seen before the pandemic. Recent weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by the Board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor ADP were especially volatile but, on balance, appeared consistent with a pickup in the pace of private employment gains relative to September. The employ- ment cost index of hourly compensation in the private sector rose 4.1 percent over the 12 months ending in September; this gain was noticeably larger than the in- dex’s year-earlier 12-month change and was the fastest 12-month change since 2001. Total PCE price inflation was 4.4 percent over the 12 months ending in September, and core PCE price in- flation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 3.6 percent over the same period. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE inflation constructed by the Federal Re- serve Bank of Dallas was 2.3 percent in September. In the third quarter of 2021, the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, was little changed relative to the second quarter and remained at its highest level since 2014. Real PCE posted a modest increase in the third quarter after having risen sharply over the first half of the year. The third-quarter slowdown appeared to reflect a com- bination of factors, including the waning effect of previ- ous fiscal stimulus measures, the surge in COVID-19 cases over the summer, and a plunge in motor vehicle purchases as extremely low dealer inventories con- strained sales. Residential investment dropped further in the third quarter; although demand for housing was strong, shortages of construction supplies as well as tight land and labor markets restrained residential construc- tion activity. Growth in business fixed investment slowed sharply in the third quarter, as supply bottlenecks—particularly for motor vehicles—weighed on business equipment spending and a limited availability of construction mate- rials held back spending on nonresidential structures. Manufacturing output declined in September. Motor ve- hicle output stepped down further as semiconductor shortages continued to restrain production; in addition, Hurricane Ida resulted in prolonged plant outages in the petrochemical, refining, and plastic resins industries. Total real government purchases posted a small increase in the third quarter after having declined in the second quarter. Although real state and local purchases in- creased, the gain was largely offset by declines in both federal defense and nondefense purchases. The U.S. international trade deficit widened in August, reflecting a moderate pace of import growth against a subdued pace of export growth. Real import growth was driven by increases in consumer goods and industrial supplies. Real export growth was held back by declines in capital goods, agricultural products, and automotive products. Bottlenecks in the global semiconductor in- dustry continued to weigh on exports and imports of au- tomotive products, and shipping congestion continued to restrain trade overall. Advance estimates for Septem- ber suggested that goods imports rose while goods ex- ports fell, pointing to a further widening of the trade def- icit. The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimated that a drop in net exports subtracted substantially from real GDP growth in the third quarter. Foreign GDP growth slowed modestly in the third quar- ter, as supply chain disruptions and the resurgence of COVID-19 weighed on production, particularly in China and other emerging market economies (EMEs). In several EMEs, public health restrictions were rein- stated, resulting in factory closures. Moreover, Chinese manufacturing output was curtailed by the rationing of electricity amid a coal shortage resulting in part from policies to lower carbon emissions. In contrast to EMEs, advanced foreign economies (AFEs) generally continued to recover at a solid pace in the third quarter, as the boost from the further reopening of high-contact services activity was only partially offset by the drag from bottlenecks, the spread of the virus, and, in some places, labor shortages. Twelve-month rates of inflation abroad continued to rise, reflecting further increases in energy prices, persistent pressures from supply bottle- necks, and past exchange rate depreciation in some EMEs. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, an increase in perceived inflation risks and an associated upward revision in the market-implied path of the federal funds rate contrib- uted to increases in Treasury yields. Long-term sover- eign yields in AFEs also increased notably. Despite Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ these pressures, broad domestic equity indexes in- creased, on net, supported by strong earnings reports. Spreads of corporate bonds were little changed overall. Short-term funding markets were stable, while participa- tion in the ON RRP facility increased further, to its high- est level since the facility was put in place. Market-based financing conditions were accommodative, and bank lending standards eased for most loan categories. Market participants’ views on the expected path for the federal funds rate over the next few years—implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes—rose sub- stantially since the September FOMC meeting, appar- ently in response to perceived risks of higher inflation. Those risks also contributed to increases in Treasury yields, with 2-, 5-, and 10-year yields rising notably on net. Broad equity indexes increased, on net, over the inter- meeting period. Perceptions of increased risks related to inflation were more than offset by a short-term resolu- tion of the debt ceiling, a decrease in perceived risks re- lated to the effect of the pandemic on the pace of the economic recovery, and stronger-than-expected third- quarter earnings. The VIX declined notably to near pre- pandemic levels. Spreads on corporate bonds were little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period and re- mained at low levels. Spreads of municipal bonds nar- rowed slightly. Short-term funding markets were stable over the inter- meeting period. The effective federal funds rate re- mained at 8 basis points throughout the period except on month-ends, while the SOFR averaged 5 basis points. Consistent with relatively low Treasury bill supply and abundant liquidity, participation in ON RRP operations increased from an average of $1.1 trillion over the previ- ous intermeeting period to $1.4 trillion, reaching a new high of $1.6 trillion on the September quarter-end. In major foreign markets, sovereign yields rose notably over the intermeeting period, as did inflation compensa- tion and market-implied measures of expected policy rates, amid sharp further increases in energy prices, con- cerns about higher inflation, and communications by some foreign central banks that were seen as signaling a faster removal of monetary policy accommodation. Market concerns about risks of a downturn in the Chi- nese real estate sector remained elevated, and inflows into funds investing in China slowed, but the effects on broader financial markets were limited. On balance, ma- jor foreign equity indexes increased moderately, and the broad dollar appreciated a touch. In domestic credit markets, financing conditions faced by nonfinancial firms in capital markets remained highly accommodative over the intermeeting period. Gross corporate bond issuance stayed strong in September and October. Gross leveraged loan issuance decreased slightly in September after its strong growth in August. Equity raised through traditional initial public offerings remained robust in September and October, while equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies remained at the subdued levels seen in recent months. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans declined notably in the third quarter amid ongoing forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Program loans. In the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported easing standards and terms, on net, for C&I loans over the third quarter. Banks also reported that demand for C&I loans was about unchanged over the third quarter after strength- ening for the previous two quarters; on balance, loan de- mand was still weaker than before the pandemic. The credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations re- mained strong. The volume of credit rating upgrades for speculative-grade nonfinancial corporate bonds out- paced downgrades in September and October. Trailing default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans de- creased from already low levels, while market indicators of future expected default rates remained benign. In the municipal bond market, financing conditions re- mained accommodative despite a modest increase in yields. Issuance of municipal debt was strong in Sep- tember and October, and indicators of the credit quality of municipal debt remained healthy. Survey-based indicators suggested that small business owners became less pessimistic about their financial pro- spects, with the exception of owners in the educational services sector, for whom expectations deteriorated slightly. While loan originations to small businesses fell a bit, the results from the October SLOOS suggested that the decline appeared to reflect weak demand, par- ticularly for small and very small firms. Commercial real estate loan balances on banks’ books strengthened, and, in the October SLOOS, banks re- ported an easing of standards on such loans over the third quarter. Issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) remained robust, supported by spreads of agency CMBS generally at or below pre-pan- demic levels. Delinquency rates on mortgages in CMBS pools continued to fall but remained elevated for CMBS backed by hotel and retail properties. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 2–3, 2021Page 5 In the residential mortgage market, financing conditions remained accommodative, particularly for borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. In the Oc- tober SLOOS, banks reported easing lending standards for almost all major mortgage categories. Mortgage rates increased modestly over the intermeeting period but did not rise as much as the 10-year Treasury yield. Indica- tors of mortgage originations for home purchases and refinancing remained fairly robust. The share of mort- gages in forbearance continued to decline through Oc- tober, and the rate of new transitions into delinquency stayed low by historical standards. Financing conditions for consumer credit remained ac- commodative for most borrowers, especially those with stronger credit scores. Lending standards for nonprime consumers in the credit card market continued to ease but remained slightly tighter than pre-pandemic levels. In the October SLOOS, banks reported easier standards for credit cards and auto loans over the third quarter. While demand for credit cards strengthened, auto loan growth slowed in response to low dealer inventories and a weakening of auto sales. The staff provided an update on indicators related to the stability of the financial system. The staff noted that as- set valuations remained generally high relative to histor- ical norms. In particular, bond and leveraged loan spreads remained narrow, while equity prices continued to increase, supported by strong earnings expectations, still-low Treasury yields, and high risk appetite. House prices rose rapidly, outpacing rents, but the staff did not see signs of loose mortgage underwriting standards or excessive mortgage credit growth that could potentially amplify a shock arising from falling house prices. For households, the level of consumer debt was largely un- changed on an inflation-adjusted basis, while delinquen- cies returned to pre-pandemic levels or below. For non- financial businesses, measures of leverage in the corpo- rate sector fell over the second quarter and largely re- turned to pre-pandemic levels; in addition, the level of corporate debt became more sustainable as earnings in- creased and rates remained low. In the financial sector, the staff noted that banks were strongly capitalized, with high levels of stable funding and high-quality liquid as- sets. The mean level of gross hedge fund leverage was noteworthy and its distribution was skewed, with partic- ularly high leverage among funds in the top decile. Vul- nerabilities associated with funding risks remained at money funds and other mutual funds. In addition, fund- ing risks were an emerging concern at entities issuing sta- blecoins, because they appeared to have structural ma- turity and liquidity transformation vulnerabilities similar to those for money funds but with considerably less transparency and an underdeveloped regulatory frame- work. The staff noted that the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets was engaged in interagency work to address these risks. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the November FOMC meeting was slightly weaker than the September projection. Incoming data suggested that the resolution of supply constraints was starting later and would be more gradual than previously assumed; even so, real GDP was expected to post a siz- able gain over 2021 as a whole. In 2022, real GDP growth was expected to remain close to its 2021 pace, supported by the continued reopening of the economy and the resolution of supply constraints in most sectors. With the boost from these factors fading, real GDP growth was projected to step down noticeably in 2023 and to be close to potential output growth in 2023 and 2024. However, the level of real GDP was expected to remain well above potential throughout the projection period, and the unemployment rate was expected to de- cline to historically low levels. The staff’s near-term outlook for inflation was revised up, as consumer food and energy prices had risen faster than expected and production bottlenecks and recent wage gains were seen as putting somewhat greater up- ward pressure on prices than had been anticipated. As a result, the 12-month change in PCE prices was projected to move up further relative to September’s pace and to end the year well above 2 percent. Over the following two years, the boost to consumer prices caused by sup- ply issues was expected to partly reverse, and resource utilization was projected to tighten further. PCE price inflation was therefore expected to step down to 2 per- cent in 2022 and to 1.9 percent in 2023 before edging back up to 2 percent in 2024. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks around the inflation projec- tion were skewed to the upside. In particular, the possi- bility of another sizable wave of COVID-19 cases in the winter was seen as an important source of downside risk to activity, while the possibility of more severe and per- sistent supply issues was viewed as an additional down- side risk to activity and as an upside risk to inflation. Participants’ Views on Current Economic Condi- tions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that, with progress on vaccinations and strong Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ policy support, indicators of economic activity and em- ployment had continued to strengthen. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months, but the summer’s rise in COVID-19 cases had slowed their recovery. Inflation was elevated, largely reflecting factors that were expected to be transi- tory. Supply and demand imbalances related to the pan- demic and the reopening of the economy had contrib- uted to sizable price increases in some sectors. Overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Participants noted that the path of the economy contin- ued to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints were ex- pected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation, but risks to the economic outlook remained. Participants observed that growth in economic activity had slowed in the third quarter to a rate significantly be- low the robust pace seen in the first half of the year. The spread of the Delta variant had contributed to the slow- down in growth in the third quarter by damping house- hold and business spending, holding down labor supply, and intensifying supply chain disruptions. Participants noted that the underlying conditions supporting growth in demand remained strong and that, as the number of COVID-19 cases remained well below the summer’s lev- els, growth in economic activity would likely show a pickup in the fourth quarter. They further foresaw ro- bust growth in 2022, supported by progress on vaccina- tions and an easing of supply constraints. In their discussion of the household sector, participants remarked that demand for most consumer goods had re- mained strong. They noted that businesses had generally recorded robust sales despite labor shortages and other supply disruptions that had prevented them from fully meeting higher demand for their products. Participants interpreted available data as suggesting that the spread of the Delta variant had slowed the shift of consumer demand toward purchases of services and away from spending on goods, stretching out the full reopening of the economy and intensifying supply and demand imbal- ances. Participants observed that households had strong balance sheets and that consumer spending would also be supported by accommodative financial conditions. A number of participants noted that there was likely to be a drag on household spending as previous fiscal support faded, or that fiscal policy might provide some support to aggregate demand if the Congress authorized major new federal appropriations. Participants remarked that supply chain challenges and limited labor availability continued to be major con- straints on manufacturing activity and the business sec- tor more broadly. Bottleneck pressures faced by busi- nesses were accompanied by global supply chain disrup- tions associated with major backlogs in shipments and transportation as well as surging demand for a variety of goods, shortages of labor and other inputs, increases in costs of production, and depleted inventory levels in key sectors. Many business contacts had experienced a worsening of supply chain problems, and participants re- ported that firms had responded to these challenges by taking a variety of actions, including raising prices, turn- ing away customers, restructuring supply chains, and us- ing alternative, but higher-cost, shipping options. Par- ticipants judged that supply constraints would likely con- tinue for longer than they had previously expected. Participants noted that data received over the intermeet- ing period indicated that labor market conditions had continued to improve. Although the September increase in payrolls had been moderate compared with recent months, the unemployment rate had declined further and previous months’ job growth had been revised up. Participants observed that September’s rise in payrolls had been held down by a shortage of workers, in part reflecting the ongoing effect of the virus on labor supply decisions. With COVID-19 cases expected to remain below the summer’s levels, participants anticipated bet- ter payroll numbers in the months ahead. Participants indicated that District contacts continued to report dif- ficulties in finding and retaining workers and that, in ad- dition to offering higher wages, businesses were turning to increased use of automation. While recognizing that labor market conditions varied significantly across the country, some participants cited a number of signs that the U.S. labor market was very tight: These included data on quits, job availability, and stronger rates of nominal wage growth reflected in the recent rise in the employment cost index, as well as the readings provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kan- sas City’s Labor Market Conditions Indicators. A num- ber of participants observed that the labor force partici- pation rate remained well below the level reached before the pandemic. Several participants judged that labor force participation would be structurally lower than in the past, and a few of these participants cited the high level of retirements recorded since the start of the pan- demic. Several other participants suggested that labor supply was currently being depressed by pandemic-re- lated factors such as disruptions related to caregiving ar- _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 2–3, 2021Page 7 rangements and noted that the importance of such fac- tors would likely diminish as economic and public health conditions improved further. Participants generally saw the current elevated level of inflation as largely reflecting factors that were likely to be transitory but judged that inflation pressures could take longer to subside than they had previously assessed. They remarked that the Delta wave had intensified the impediments to supply chains and had helped sustain the high level of goods demand, adding to the upward pres- sure on prices. Participants also observed that increases in energy prices, stronger rates of nominal wage growth, and higher housing rental costs had been forces adding to inflation. Some participants highlighted the fact that price increases had become more widespread. Although participants expected significant inflation pressures to last for longer than they previously expected, they gen- erally continued to anticipate that the inflation rate would diminish significantly during 2022 as supply and demand imbalances abated. Nonetheless, they indicated that their uncertainty regarding this assessment had in- creased. Many participants pointed to considerations that might suggest that elevated inflation could prove more persistent. These participants noted that average inflation already exceeded 2 percent when measured on a multiyear basis and cited a number of factors—such as businesses’ enhanced scope to pass on higher costs to their customers, the possibility that nominal wage growth had become more sensitive to labor market pres- sures, or accommodative financial conditions—that might result in inflation continuing at elevated levels. Some other participants, however, remarked that al- though inflationary pressures were lasting longer than anticipated, those pressures continued to reflect the same pandemic-related imbalances and would likely abate when supply constraints eased. These participants also noted that the most sizable price increases may have already occurred, that there was as yet little evidence of a change in inflation dynamics—such as the develop- ment of a wage–price spiral—that would tend to pro- long elevated levels of inflation, and that forces already in motion would likely bring inflation down toward 2 percent over the medium term. Participants were at- tentive to the sizable increase in the cost of living that had taken place this year and the associated burden on U.S. households, particularly those who had limited scope to pay higher prices for essential goods and ser- vices. In their comments on inflation expectations, a number of participants discussed the risk that, in light of recent elevated levels of inflation, the public’s longer-term ex- pectations of inflation might increase to a level above that consistent with the Committee’s longer-run infla- tion objective; such a development could make it harder for the Committee to achieve 2 percent inflation over the longer run. A couple of participants pointed to in- creases in survey- and market-based indicators of ex- pected inflation—including the notable rise in the five- year TIPS-based measure of inflation compensation—as possible signs that inflation expectations were becoming less well anchored. Several other participants, however, remarked that measures of near- and medium-term in- flation expectations typically had been sensitive to movements in realized inflation and that they had not exhibited greater sensitivity recently. They additionally pointed out that indicators of longer-term inflation ex- pectations—including the five-year, five-year-forward measure of inflation compensation—continued to dis- play less sensitivity to realized inflation and remained well anchored at levels consistent with the Committee’s longer-run 2 percent goal. Participants observed that uncertainty about the eco- nomic outlook remained high. They particularly stressed uncertainties associated with the labor market, including the evolution of labor force participation, and with the length of time required to resolve the supply chain situ- ation. Participants cited upside risks to inflation, includ- ing those associated with strong demand for goods and a tight labor market. Upside risks to economic activity included a potential near-term boost to aggregate de- mand that could arise from the drawing down of the substantial savings accumulated by households since the beginning of the pandemic. A few participants men- tioned an upsurge in COVID-19 cases during the com- ing winter or an emergence of new virus strains as pos- sibilities that, if they were realized, would damp eco- nomic activity and intensify price pressures. A number of participants commented on issues related to financial stability. A couple of participants noted fac- tors supporting the strength and resilience of the U.S. fi- nancial system, including the solid capital and liquidity conditions of banks and the fact that underwriting stand- ards for residential mortgages had not eased substantially in an environment of rising house prices. A few partici- pants emphasized the importance of maintaining strong bank capital positions, particularly at the largest banks. A few participants also cited a number of factors repre- senting potential vulnerabilities to the financial system: These included elevated asset valuations prevailing widely across asset classes, the growing exposure of Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ banks to nonbank financial firms, and the risk of a sud- den reduction in the liquidity of collateral used at central counterparty clearing and settlement systems. In the area of cybersecurity, a few participants stressed the im- portance of greater preparedness against a cyberattack that could disrupt the nation’s payments process and fi- nancial system. Several participants commented on the financial stability risks—including those relating to ma- turity and liquidity transformation—associated with sta- blecoins and on the need for regulators to address these risks. A few participants noted the importance of devel- oping systematic monitoring of the climate-related risks facing the financial system. In their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants agreed that the economy had made substan- tial further progress toward the Committee’s goals since December 2020, when the Committee adopted its guid- ance regarding asset purchases. The unemployment rate had declined to 4.8 percent in September—about 2 per- centage points lower than the level last December—and job openings and other indicators also were pointing to widespread strength in labor demand, consistent with a broad improvement in labor market conditions. Conse- quently, participants assessed that the criterion of sub- stantial further progress had been met with regard to the Committee’s maximum employment goal. In addition, participants generally judged that the Committee’s crite- rion of substantial further progress had clearly been more than met with respect to inflation. Against this backdrop, all participants judged that, consistent with the Committee’s previous policy communications, it would be appropriate to announce at this meeting a re- duction in the pace of net asset purchases. Participants generally supported the plan to implement reductions in the pace of net purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS by $10 billion and $5 billion per month, re- spectively, over the upcoming intermeeting period and judged that similar reductions in the pace would likely be appropriate in each subsequent month. Some partici- pants preferred a somewhat faster pace of reductions that would result in an earlier conclusion to net pur- chases. Participants noted that beginning to scale back the pace of net asset purchases was not intended to con- vey any direct signal regarding adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate. They highlighted the more stringent criteria for raising the target range, com- pared with the criteria that applied to beginning to re- duce the pace of asset purchases. Participants stressed that maintaining flexibility to imple- ment appropriate policy adjustments on the basis of risk- management considerations should be a guiding princi- ple in conducting policy in the current highly uncertain environment. Some participants suggested that reducing the pace of net asset purchases by more than $15 billion each month could be warranted so that the Committee would be in a better position to make adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, particularly in light of inflation pressures. Various participants noted that the Committee should be prepared to adjust the pace of asset purchases and raise the target range for the federal funds rate sooner than participants currently anticipated if inflation continued to run higher than levels consistent with the Committee’s objectives. At the same time, be- cause of the continuing considerable uncertainty about developments in supply chains, production logistics, and the course of the virus, a number of participants stressed that a patient attitude toward incoming data remained appropriate to allow for careful evaluation of evolving supply chain developments and their implications for the labor market and inflation. That said, participants noted that the Committee would not hesitate to take appropri- ate actions to address inflation pressures that posed risks to its longer-run price stability and employment objec- tives. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. They noted that the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but that the summer’s rise in COVID-19 cases had slowed their re- covery. Inflation was elevated, largely reflecting factors that were expected to be transitory. They remarked that supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy had contributed to sizable price increases in some sectors. Overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Members also acknowledged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vac- cinations and an easing of supply constraints were ex- pected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation, but risks to the economic outlook remained. Members agreed that the postmeeting statement should acknowledge that the sectors of the economy most ad- versely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months, but that the summer’s rise in COVID-19 cases had slowed their recovery. They also concurred that it _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 2–3, 2021Page 9 would be appropriate to convey less certainty about the path of inflation by noting that the factors driving ele- vated inflation “are expected to be transitory.” In order to provide additional information about these factors, members further decided that the postmeeting state- ment would say that “supply and demand imbalances re- lated to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have contributed to sizable price increases in some sec- tors.” Members also agreed to include a sentence stating that “progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints are expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation.” Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was commit- ted to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. All members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the Com- mittee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and in- flation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, and with inflation having run persistently below this longer- run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expecta- tions remain well anchored at 2 percent. Members ex- pected to maintain an accommodative stance of mone- tary policy until those outcomes were achieved. In their discussion of monetary policy in the period ahead, members agreed that, in light of the substantial further progress the economy had made toward the Committee’s goals since last December, the Committee should begin to slow the pace of its asset purchases at this meeting. Consistent with this approach, the Com- mittee decided to start reducing the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $10 billion for Treasury securities and $5 billion for agency MBS. Consequently, the Com- mittee agreed that, beginning with the purchase schedule published in mid-November, it would increase its hold- ings of Treasury securities by at least $70 billion per month rather than $80 billion per month and would in- crease its holdings of agency MBS by at least $35 billion per month, rather than $40 billion per month. Because the Open Market Desk would be releasing two monthly purchase schedules between the November and December FOMC meetings, the Committee further de- cided to add to the postmeeting statement an indication that, beginning in December, the Committee would in- crease its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $60 billion per month and of agency MBS by at least $30 billion per month. Members decided the postmeeting statement should state that the Committee judged that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases would likely be appro- priate in subsequent months, implying that increases in securities holdings would cease by the middle of next year under the Committee’s outlook. Members also noted that the Committee was prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the eco- nomic outlook and agreed that the postmeeting state- ment should say so. Members agreed that the addition of this language would acknowledge the importance of maintaining flexibility to adjust the stance of policy as appropriate in response to changes in the Committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation. Members agreed that the statement should continue to note that the Committee’s ongoing asset purchases helped foster smooth market functioning and accommodative finan- cial conditions. Additionally, members decided to intro- duce into the postmeeting statement a reference to the Federal Reserve’s “holdings of securities” in the sen- tence describing the economic effects of asset purchases. This addition would make clear that, even after net in- creases in the SOMA portfolio ceased, the Federal Re- serve’s elevated securities holdings would continue to support accommodative financial conditions. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. They also concurred that, in as- sessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective November 4, 2021, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to:  Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent.  Complete the increase in System Open Market Account (SOMA) holdings of Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Treasury securities by $80 billion and of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $40 billion, as indicated in the monthly purchase plans released in mid-October. Increase the SOMA holdings of Treasury securities by $70 billion and of agency MBS by $35 billion, during the monthly purchase period beginning in mid-November. Increase the SOMA holdings of Treasury securities by $60 billion and of agency MBS by $30 billion, during the monthly purchase period beginning in mid-December. Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by additional amounts as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities.     Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate opera- tion limit of $500 billion; the aggregate op- eration limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-coun- terparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS.  Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. With progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months, but the sum- mer’s rise in COVID-19 cases has slowed their recovery. Inflation is elevated, largely reflecting factors that are expected to be transitory. Sup- ply and demand imbalances related to the pan- demic and the reopening of the economy have contributed to sizable price increases in some sectors. Overall financial conditions remain ac- commodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccina- tions and an easing of supply constraints are ex- pected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation. Risks to the economic outlook re- main. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation having run persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moder- ately above 2 percent for some time so that in- flation averages 2 percent over time and longer- term inflation expectations remain well an- chored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and ex- pects it will be appropriate to maintain this tar- get range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and in- flation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In light of the substantial further progress the economy has made toward the Committee’s goals since last December, the Committee de- cided to begin reducing the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $10 billion for Treasury securities and $5 billion for agency mortgage- backed securities. Beginning later this month, the Committee will increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $70 billion per _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 2–3, 2021Page 11 month and of agency mortgage-backed securi- ties by at least $35 billion per month. Beginning in December, the Committee will increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $60 billion per month and of agency mortgage- backed securities by at least $30 billion per month. The Committee judges that similar re- ductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, but it is pre- pared to adjust the pace of purchases if war- ranted by changes in the economic outlook. The Federal Reserve’s ongoing purchases and holdings of securities will continue to foster smooth market functioning and accommoda- tive financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective No- vember 4, 2021. The Board also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective November 4, 2021. Following these actions, the Chair commented on the critical importance of maintaining the public’s trust and confidence in the Federal Reserve as an institution. In this regard, the Chair noted the recent announcement of changes in the rules regarding financial investments and transactions for Federal Reserve officials and indicated that efforts were under way to implement these new rules expeditiously. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, December 14– 15, 2021. The meeting adjourned at 10:35 a.m. on No- vember 3, 2021. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on October 12, 2021, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 21–22, 2021. Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, Randal K. Quarles, and Christopher J. Waller. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee December 14–15, 2021 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held by videoconference on Tuesday, Decem- ber 14, 2021, at 9:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, December 15, 2021, at 9:00 a.m.1 Paulson, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Attendance Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Thomas I. Barkin Raphael W. Bostic Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Richard H. Clarida Mary C. Daly Charles L. Evans Randal K. Quarles Christopher J. Waller Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board James Bullard, Esther L. George, Naureen Hassan, Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of Loretta J. Mester, and Kenneth C. Montgomery, Alternate Members of the Committee Patrick Harker and Neel Kashkari, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Minneapolis, respectively Meredith Black, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Brian M. Doyle,2 Rochelle M. Edge, Sylvain Leduc, Anna International Finance, Board; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Jon Faust and Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Advisers to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board William F. Bassett, Antulio N. Bomfim, Burcu Duygan- Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, Chiara Scotti, and Nitish R. Sinha, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board David López-Salido and Min Wei, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; John J. Stevens, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Paul R. Wood,4 Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 3 Attended through the discussion of policy normalization considerations. 4 Attended through the discussion of policy normalization considerations and all of Wednesday’s session. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Edward Nelson and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Eric C. Engstrom and Elizabeth K. Kiser, Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Christopher J. Gust, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Jeffrey D. Walker,3 Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Norman J. Morin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Zeynep Senyuz3 and Rebecca Zarutskie, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Brian J. Bonis, Etienne Gagnon,3 and Dan Li, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Paul Lengermann, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Alyssa G. Anderson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Penelope A. Beattie,2 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board Camille Bryan, Senior Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Randall A. Williams, Group Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jonathan E. Goldberg,3 Sebastian Infante, and Francisco Vazquez-Grande, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board James Hebden3 and James M. Trevino,3 Lead Technology Analysts, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Zina Bushra Saijid,3 Senior Financial Analyst, Division of International Finance, Board Isaiah C. Ahn, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Becky C. Bareford, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Joseph W. Gruber and Geoffrey Tootell, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Boston, respectively David Andolfatto, Anne Baum, Todd E. Clark, Marc Giannoni, Mark L.J. Wright, and, Nathaniel Wuerffel,3 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, New York, Cleveland, Dallas, Minneapolis, and New York, respectively Roc Armenter, Kathryn B. Chen,3 Jonathan P. McCarthy, and Matthew D. Raskin,3 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, New York, and New York, respectively Robert Lerman3 and Jamie Pfeifer,3 Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Linsey Molloy,3 Quantitative Policy and Analysis Manager, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments over the period. Financial mar- kets responded to significant new information about the economy and monetary policy, as well as the emergence of the Omicron variant. Overall, domestic financial con- ditions tightened modestly but remained near historically accommodative levels. Expectations for an earlier re- duction in Federal Reserve policy accommodation lifted short-term interest rates and supported the dollar. While prices of equities that are sensitive to COVID-19 risks declined significantly, the S&P 500 index was little changed. Over the period, market participants considered poten- tial drivers of the notable decline in far-forward sover- eign yields in the United States and other advanced econ- omies. News of the Omicron variant reportedly drove safe-haven flows into sovereign bonds, pushing term premiums lower. The significant co-movement between far-forward yields and the share prices of firms most af- fected by social distancing was consistent with this inter- pretation. In addition to the effects of the pandemic on risk sentiment, some discussed the potential for COVID to become endemic, possibly resulting in modestly lower potential growth over time and a lower long-run neutral level of the federal funds rate. Regarding the outlook for U.S. monetary policy, expec- tations for a reduction in policy accommodation shifted forward notably. Respondents to the Open Market Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market partici- pants broadly projected that the Committee would quicken the pace of reduction in the Federal Reserve’s net purchases of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and the median re- spondent projected net asset purchases to end in March 2022. The median respondent’s projected timing for the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate also moved earlier from the first quarter of 2023 to June 2022. Although the Desk surveys and interest rate futures in- dicated expectations for earlier increases in the target range than at the time of the November meeting, expec- tations for the federal funds rate at longer horizons did not appear to have risen. In addition, the average of probability distributions for the federal funds rate re- ported in the Desk surveys suggested considerable un- certainty about the path of the federal funds rate, as sur- vey respondents placed significant odds on a range of outcomes. With the likely timing of the beginning of the removal of policy accommodation considered closer, market participants began to discuss how balance sheet policy might feature in the Committee’s plan for reduc- ing accommodation when warranted, although expecta- tions for the timing of the first decline in the balance sheet were diffuse. The manager turned next to a discussion of foreign de- velopments. Foreign policy-sensitive rates were rela- tively steady over the intermeeting period, as several cen- tral banks in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) sig- naled somewhat cautious approaches to the removal of policy accommodation. Market participants continued to focus on risks related to economic and financial de- velopments in China, though near-term concerns had moderated some following steps by Chinese authorities to ease policy. Turning to Desk operations and money markets, the manager noted that the Desk had reduced net purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS in accordance with the directive issued at the November meeting. Overall, the transition to a slower pace of purchases had gone smoothly. In money markets, news that a path had emerged to a resolution of the debt ceiling impasse led yields on Treasury bills maturing in December and Jan- uary to decline. Following the resolution, the Treasury was expected to increase bill issuance to restore the Treasury General Account to more normal levels. Mar- ket participants generally were not anticipating signifi- cant strains in money market conditions over year end. In discussing recently established backstop facilities, the manager noted continued progress towards expanding access to the standing repurchase agreement (repo) fa- cility (SRF) to depository institutions; a number of insti- tutions were currently in the process of becoming SRF counterparties. The Federal Reserve also continued to onboard new counterparties for the Foreign and Inter- national Monetary Authorities Repo Facility, and cus- tomers to the facility now represented the majority of foreign and international monetary authorities’ custody holdings of Treasury securities at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The temporary dollar liquidity swap lines established in March 2020 were set to expire on December 31; the Committee’s foreign currency di- rective would be updated at the January meeting to re- flect the expiration of those lines. Finally, the manager provided an update on the transi- tion away from LIBOR (London interbank offered rate). Overall, considerable progress had been made in the transition away from LIBOR to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) in cash and derivatives markets. However, a few key areas of work remained. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Discussion of Policy Normalization Considerations Participants began a discussion of a range of topics as- sociated with the eventual normalization of the stance of monetary policy. The topics included the lessons learned from the Committee’s previous experience with policy normalization, alternative approaches for remov- ing policy accommodation, the timing and sequencing of policy normalization actions, and the appropriate size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in the longer run. They agreed that their discussion at this meeting would be helpful background for the Com- mittee’s future decisions regarding policy normalization. No decisions regarding the Committee’s approach were made at the meeting. The participants’ discussion was preceded by staff presentations. The staff reviewed the previous normali- zation episode, including how the Committee com- menced normalization by raising the target range for the federal funds rate and then reducing the Federal Re- serve’s asset holdings in a gradual and predictable man- ner, as well as the timing of these steps. The staff then discussed some of the channels through which policy rate and balance sheet actions affect financial conditions Minutes of the Meeting of December 14–15, 2021Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ and alternative ways these tools could be deployed to re- duce policy accommodation in support of the Commit- tee’s macroeconomic goals. The staff presentation in- cluded assessments of the implications for the yield curve of alternative settings of the two tools, the relative uncertainty of the effects of each tool, and the challenges associated with conducting and communicating policy with multiple tools. Finally, the staff reviewed the expe- rience of foreign central banks with policy normaliza- tion. Participants judged that several aspects of the previous approach remained applicable in the current environ- ment. In particular, they noted that the principles and plans underlying policy normalization were communi- cated in advance of any decisions or actions, which en- hanced the public’s understanding and thus the effec- tiveness of monetary policy during that period. At the same time, participants remarked that the previous ex- perience highlighted the benefits of maintaining the flex- ibility to adjust the details of the approach to normaliza- tion in response to economic and financial develop- ments. Participants generally emphasized that, as in the previous normalization episode and as expressed in the Committee’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Mon- etary Policy Strategy, changes in the target range for the federal funds rate should be the Committee’s primary means for adjusting the stance of monetary policy in support of its maximum-employment and price-stability objectives. This preference reflected the view that there is less uncertainty about the effects of changes in the fed- eral funds rate on the economy than about the effects of changes in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Moreo- ver, participants stated that the federal funds rate is a more familiar tool to the general public and therefore is advantageous for communication purposes. A few par- ticipants also noted that when the federal funds rate is away from the effective lower bound (ELB), the Com- mittee could more nimbly change interest rate policy than balance sheet policy in response to economic con- ditions. Participants also discussed some key differences be- tween current economic conditions and those that pre- vailed during the previous episode and remarked that the Committee would have to take these differences into ac- count in removing policy accommodation. Most nota- bly, participants remarked that the current economic outlook was much stronger, with higher inflation and a tighter labor market than at the beginning of the previ- ous normalization episode. They also observed that the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet was much larger, both in dollar terms and relative to nominal gross domestic product (GDP), than it was at the end of the third large- scale asset purchase program in late 2014. Participants noted that the current weighted average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s Treasury holdings was shorter than at the beginning of the previous normalization episode. Some observed that, as a result, depending on the size of any caps put on the pace of runoff, the balance sheet could potentially shrink faster than last time if the Com- mittee followed its previous approach in phasing out the reinvestment of maturing Treasury securities and princi- pal payments on agency MBS. However, several partic- ipants raised concerns about vulnerabilities in the Treas- ury market and how those vulnerabilities could affect the appropriate pace of balance sheet normalization. A cou- ple of participants noted that the SRF could help to mit- igate such concerns. Participants also judged the Federal Reserve to be better positioned for normalization than in the past, as the ample-reserves framework and the Federal Reserve’s current interest rate control tools, in- cluding interest on reserve balances and the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility, are in place and working well. Some participants judged that a significant amount of balance sheet shrinkage could be appropriate over the normalization process, especially in light of abundant liquidity in money markets and ele- vated usage of the ON RRP facility. Participants had an initial discussion about the appropri- ate conditions and timing for starting balance sheet run- off relative to raising the federal funds rate from the ELB. They also discussed how this relative timing might differ from the previous experience, in which balance sheet runoff commenced almost two years after policy rate liftoff when the normalization of the federal funds rate was judged to be well under way. Almost all partic- ipants agreed that it would likely be appropriate to initi- ate balance sheet runoff at some point after the first in- crease in the target range for the federal funds rate. However, participants judged that the appropriate tim- ing of balance sheet runoff would likely be closer to that of policy rate liftoff than in the Committee’s previous experience. They noted that current conditions included a stronger economic outlook, higher inflation, and a larger balance sheet and thus could warrant a potentially faster pace of policy rate normalization. They empha- sized that the decision to initiate runoff would be data dependent. Some participants commented that removing policy ac- commodation by relying more on balance sheet reduc- tion and less on increases in the policy rate could help limit yield curve flattening during policy normalization. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ A few of these participants raised concerns that a rela- tively flat yield curve could adversely affect interest mar- gins for some financial intermediaries, which may raise financial stability risks. However, a couple of other par- ticipants referenced staff analysis and previous experi- ence in noting that many factors can affect longer-dated yields, making it difficult to judge how a different policy mix would affect the shape of the yield curve. Many participants judged that the appropriate pace of balance sheet runoff would likely be faster than it was during the previous normalization episode. Many par- ticipants also judged that monthly caps on the runoff of securities could help ensure that the pace of runoff would be measured and predictable, particularly given the shorter weighted average maturity of the Federal Re- serve’s Treasury security holdings. Participants discussed considerations regarding the longer-run size of the balance sheet consistent with the efficient and effective implementation of monetary pol- icy in an ample-reserves regime. Participants noted that the current size of the balance sheet is elevated and would likely remain so for some time after the process of normalizing the balance sheet was under way. Several participants noted that the level of reserves that would ultimately be needed to implement monetary policy ef- fectively is uncertain, because the underlying demand for reserves by banks is time varying. In light of this uncer- tainty and the Committee’s previous experience, a cou- ple of participants expressed a preference to allow for a substantial buffer level of reserves to support interest rate control. Participants noted that it would be im- portant to carefully monitor developments in money markets as the level of reserves fell to help inform the Committee’s eventual assessment of the appropriate level for the balance sheet in the longer run. Some par- ticipants expressed the view that the SRF would help en- sure interest rate control as the size of the balance sheet approached its longer-run level; several participants noted that the SRF could facilitate a faster runoff of the balance sheet than might otherwise be the case; several participants raised the possibility that the establishment of the SRF could reduce the demand for reserves in the longer run, suggesting that the longer-run balance sheet could be smaller than otherwise. Participants also discussed the composition of the Fed- eral Reserve’s asset holdings. Consistent with the previ- ous normalization principles, some participants ex- pressed a preference for the Federal Reserve’s asset holdings to consist primarily of Treasury securities in the longer run. To achieve such a composition, some par- ticipants favored reinvesting principal from agency MBS into Treasury securities relatively soon or letting agency MBS run off the balance sheet faster than Treasury se- curities. Participants welcomed additional analysis from the staff on issues related to normalization and agreed that con- tinuing their deliberations at upcoming meetings would be useful. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the Decem- ber 14–15 meeting suggested that U.S. real GDP growth was picking up in the fourth quarter after having slowed in the third quarter. Labor market conditions continued to improve in October and November, and measures of compensation had risen sharply so far this year. Con- sumer price inflation through October—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)—remained elevated. Total nonfarm payroll employment rose solidly, on av- erage, in October and November, but the average gain was below that seen in recent quarters. The unemploy- ment rate declined from 4.8 percent in September to 4.2 percent in November; the unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics also declined substan- tially over this period, but both rates remained well above the national average. The labor force participa- tion rate and the employment-to-population ratio both moved up in November. Private-sector job openings, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Sur- vey, remained well above pre-pandemic levels; quits rates also stayed elevated despite edging down in Octo- ber. The four-week moving average of initial claims for regular state unemployment insurance moved lower through early December and was at a level similar to that seen before the pandemic. Recent weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by the Board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor ADP pointed to a further increase in private employment through early December. Average hourly earnings rose 4.8 percent over the 12 months ending in November, with sizable wage gains observed across most sectors. Inflation readings remained high, and various indicators suggested that inflationary pressures had broadened in recent months. Total PCE price inflation was 5.0 per- cent over the 12 months ending in October, and core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in con- sumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.1 percent over the same period. The trimmed Minutes of the Meeting of December 14–15, 2021Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ mean measure of 12-month PCE inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 2.6 percent in October, an increase of 0.6 percentage point relative to two months earlier. In November, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 6.8 per- cent, while core CPI inflation was 4.9 percent over the same period. Survey-based measures of medium- and longer-run inflation expectations—including those from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Con- sumer Expectations, and the Survey of Professional Forecasters—leveled off after having risen over the past year. Real PCE growth appeared to be picking up in the fourth quarter despite an upturn in COVID-19 cases, the waning effect of previous fiscal stimulus measures, lingering supply bottlenecks, and recent increases in con- sumer prices. In particular, real expenditures on retail goods rose solidly again in October, and outlays for ser- vices strengthened. In November, however, the com- ponents of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate PCE stepped down, possibly reflecting some holiday sales having been pulled forward to October. Light mo- tor vehicle sales in October and November were below their third-quarter average (though they were up, on net, relative to September), as extremely low dealer invento- ries continued to constrain sales. Housing demand re- mained strong, but indicators of housing-sector activity, including housing starts and home sales, were generally little changed in October. Shortages of construction ma- terials appeared to have hampered building completions, and there was limited availability of lots ready for con- struction. Growth in business fixed investment appeared to be ris- ing at a slow pace again in the fourth quarter, as supply bottlenecks continued to weigh on business equipment spending, and the limited availability of construction ma- terials was still holding back spending on nonresidential structures. Manufacturing output increased in October, and availa- ble indicators of production were consistent with an- other gain in November. Motor vehicle output moved up in October from its low level in September, as most assembly plants previously shuttered by semiconductor chip shortages had reopened. Outside of motor vehi- cles, manufacturing production also rose in October, partly reflecting the continued recovery from the effects of Hurricane Ida on the output of the petrochemical, re- fining, and plastic resins industries. Total real government purchases appeared to be rising moderately again in the fourth quarter. Federal defense spending rose, on net, in October and November rela- tive to the third quarter. However, growth in state and local government purchases appeared to be moderating, as payrolls decreased in October and November, and nominal state and local construction expenditures in Oc- tober were only a little above their third-quarter level. After reaching a record level in September, the U.S. in- ternational trade deficit narrowed in October, reflecting a large rebound in exports. The export rebound was broad based, with sizable increases in real exports of in- dustrial supplies, capital goods, agricultural products, and consumer goods. Exports of automotive products also picked up after having been low in recent months. Real imports were little changed in October, with in- creases in imports of automotive products and con- sumer goods offset by a decline in industrial supplies. Shipping congestion and other bottlenecks continued to restrain overall trade in goods. Exports and imports of services edged up in October but remained low relative to pre-pandemic levels, largely because international travel was still depressed. Incoming data were consistent with a pickup in foreign economic growth in the current quarter, driven mainly by the reopening of Asian economies following lock- downs earlier in the year to contain a resurgence of COVID-19 cases. Strong gains in intra-Asian trade and solid readings of purchasing managers indexes also pro- vided some early signs that production bottlenecks in the region were easing. In contrast, the introduction of new public health restrictions in Europe in response to a new wave of COVID-19 infections appeared to have re- strained economic activity in some European econo- mies. More recently, the detection and rapid spread of the Omicron variant prompted new international travel restrictions in many foreign economies. Inflation abroad continued to rise, mostly driven by further in- creases in retail energy and food prices. In addition, cost pressures from persistent bottlenecks in supply and transportation were reflected in record-high input and output price components of the purchasing managers in- dexes. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, rising inflation and FOMC communications appeared to have put substan- tial upward pressure on shorter-dated Treasury yields. Even so, longer-dated Treasury yields declined, on net, in part reflecting renewed concerns among market par- Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ ticipants about the course of the pandemic and associ- ated safe-haven flows. Pandemic-related fears as well as concerns about inflation and tighter monetary policy ap- parently weighed on risky asset prices despite continued robust economic data. In domestic markets, broad eq- uity price indexes were little changed, equity market vol- atility increased markedly, and spreads on corporate bonds widened moderately. In AFEs, sovereign yields declined, and major equity indexes edged down. Short- term funding markets were stable, while participation in the ON RRP facility increased further. Overall, financ- ing conditions for businesses and households remained accommodative except for small businesses and nonprime borrowers. Market participants’ views on the expected path for the federal funds rate—as implied by a straight read of over- night index swap quotes—suggested that they had pulled forward expected rate increases more into 2022 and 2023 compared with the timing they anticipated at the time of the previous FOMC meeting. The potential for a less accommodative policy stance over the next few years contributed to a notable rise in two- and five-year Treasury yields. On net, inflation compensation had declined moderately since the November FOMC meeting, as heightened con- cerns about the inflation outlook appeared to be out- weighed by increases in the perceived prospects for tighter monetary policy and by fears about the course of the pandemic. Renewed concerns about the course of the pandemic also contributed to a decline in the 10-year Treasury yield, on net, over the intermeeting period de- spite stronger-than-anticipated data on economic activ- ity and surprisingly high inflation. Broad equity indexes were little changed, on net, since the previous FOMC meeting, as strong economic data appeared to offset concerns regarding monetary policy, inflation, and the pandemic. Spreads of both invest- ment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds widened moderately, and spreads of municipal bonds were little changed. Short-term funding markets were stable over the inter- meeting period. Throughout the period, the effective federal funds rate remained at 8 basis points apart from a brief decrease on the November month-end, and the SOFR remained at 5 basis points. Participation in ON RRP operations increased slightly to an average of $1.5 trillion. Foreign asset prices fluctuated over the intermeeting pe- riod in response to central bank communications, head- lines regarding COVID-related restrictions in some countries, and the spread of the Omicron variant. On net, AFE sovereign yields declined, major foreign equity indexes generally edged down, and the broad dollar in- dex increased modestly. Emerging market economy (EME) sovereign spreads widened, and capital flows into EME-dedicated funds turned slightly negative in the second half of November, partly in response to concerns about the Omicron variant. A credit agency declared two heavily indebted Chinese property developers to be in “restricted default,” hurting asset prices in China’s real estate sector, but spillovers to broader financial markets were limited. In domestic credit markets, financing conditions for nonfinancial corporations remained accommodative. Gross corporate bond issuance by both investment- and speculative-grade borrowers was solid, and gross lever- aged loan issuance was robust. Equity raised through traditional initial public offerings also was strong, but eq- uity issuance through special purpose acquisition com- panies remained much weaker than earlier this year. In November, commercial and industrial (C&I) loans on banks’ books grew for the first time since the beginning of the year. The share of Paycheck Protection Program loans in C&I loan balances at banks continued to fall in the third quarter amid ongoing forgiveness of those loans. The credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations re- mained solid amid strong earnings growth. S&P 500 firms’ earnings reports for the third quarter again ex- ceeded analyst expectations. In November, the volume of upgrades outpaced that of downgrades for both in- vestment- and speculative-grade nonfinancial corporate bonds. Trailing default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans declined to close to historical lows in October and November, and market indicators of future default expectations remained benign. In the municipal bond market, issuance was robust in October and November, and financing conditions re- mained accommodative, supported by low yields. The credit quality of municipal debt continued to be stable, as the number of bond upgrades outpaced downgrades, and defaults were relatively low. Survey-based indicators suggested that credit supply conditions for small firms remained stable but tighter than before the pandemic. Small business loan origina- tions ticked down in October, likely reflecting weak loan Minutes of the Meeting of December 14–15, 2021Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ demand as suggested by survey-based and market indi- cators. Broad measures of small businesses’ financial health improved slightly. Short- and long-term delin- quency rates on loans to small businesses remained roughly in line with their pre-pandemic levels. Financing conditions in commercial real estate (CRE) markets remained accommodative. CRE loan balances on banks’ books continued to expand at a solid pace in October and November. Issuance of commercial mort- gage-backed securities (CMBS) continued to be strong, supported by spreads of agency and non-agency CMBS that were generally at or below pre-pandemic levels. De- linquency rates on mortgages in CMBS pools continued to fall but remained elevated for loans backed by hotel and retail properties. In the residential mortgage market, financing conditions stayed accommodative, particularly for borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. Conditions con- tinued to ease for lower-score borrowers but remained somewhat tighter than before the pandemic. Mortgage originations for home purchases and refinances were ro- bust through November amid historically low mortgage rates. The fraction of mortgage borrowers missing pay- ments continued to decline through October. Financing conditions for consumer credit remained ac- commodative for most borrowers, especially those with higher credit scores. Conditions for nonprime consum- ers in the credit card market continued to ease from the tight levels seen earlier in the pandemic. Growth of credit card balances picked up in September and Octo- ber, and bank credit data indicated a further increase in November. Growth of auto loans outstanding slowed through October because of tepid auto sales. Use of forbearance programs for credit card and auto loans re- mained at low levels in September and October. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. consumer price inflation pre- pared by the staff for the December FOMC meeting was higher than in the November projection. The near-term outlook was revised up, reflecting faster-than-expected increases both for a broad array of consumer prices and for wages. Supply chain bottlenecks were seen as con- tinuing to put upward pressure on prices. As a result, the 12-month change in PCE prices was projected to move up further relative to October’s pace and to end the year around 5 percent. Over the following two years, the boost to consumer prices caused by supply issues was expected to partly reverse, and energy prices were projected to decline. PCE price inflation was therefore expected to step down to 2.1 percent in 2022 and to re- main there in 2023 and 2024. Projected inflation over this period was a little higher than in the previous pro- jection, as supply bottlenecks were assumed to resolve more gradually and as the salience of this year’s higher inflation readings was assumed to raise the underlying trend in inflation relative to the previous forecast. Longer-run inflation was still assumed to remain an- chored at 2 percent. The staff’s forecast for economic activity remained strong but was weaker, on net, than in the November projection. Although aggregate demand appeared to be rising sharply in the fourth quarter, the emerging surge in COVID-19 caseloads and hospitalizations was ex- pected to weigh on economic activity in the winter months. In addition, supply bottlenecks were expected to resolve more gradually than previously assumed. All told, real GDP was expected to post a sizable gain over 2021 as a whole and to rise a bit less rapidly in 2022, with the pace of growth supported by the continued reopen- ing of the economy and the resolution of supply con- straints in most sectors. With the boost from these fac- tors fading, real GDP growth was projected to step down noticeably in 2023. Given the higher forecast for inflation, the staff assumed monetary policy would be less accommodative in coming years and therefore re- vised down the medium-term forecast for GDP some- what. Even so, the level of real GDP was expected to remain well above potential throughout the projection period, and labor market conditions were projected to remain very tight. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks around the inflation projec- tion were skewed to the upside. In particular, the possi- bility that COVID-19 cases could continue to rise steeply, especially if the Omicron variant proves to be vaccine resistant, was seen as an important source of downside risk to activity, while the possibility of more severe and persistent supply issues was viewed as an ad- ditional downside risk to activity and as an upside risk to inflation. Participants’ Views on Current Economic Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2021 through 2024 and over the longer run based on their individual assessments of ap- Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ propriate monetary policy, including the path of the fed- eral funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, un- der appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Eco- nomic Projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that, with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. The sec- tors most adversely affected by the pandemic had im- proved in recent months but continued to be affected by COVID-19. Job gains had been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. Supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy had continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. Overall finan- cial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflect- ing policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Par- ticipants commented that the path of the economy con- tinued to depend on the course of the virus. An easing of supply constraints was expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation. Risks to the economic outlook remained, including from new variants of the virus. Participants observed that growth of economic activity appeared to have been strong in the fourth quarter after having slowed in the third quarter, and they generally ex- pected robust growth to continue in 2022. A few partic- ipants cited healthy household balance sheets, the need for businesses to rebuild inventory, and accommodative financial conditions as factors supporting continued ro- bust growth. A couple of participants commented that business conditions appeared to be improving broadly, including in sectors providing in-person services, such as the retail, restaurant, and hotel sectors. Many partici- pants noted that the emergence of the Omicron variant made the economic outlook more uncertain; several re- marked that they did not yet see the new variant as fun- damentally altering the path of economic recovery in the United States. In their discussion of the household sector, participants generally noted that demand for consumer goods had remained strong, likely supported by accommodative fis- cal and monetary policies, increased household income as more people found jobs, increasing net worth of the household sector, and the high level of savings accumu- lated through the course of the pandemic. Participants noted that supply chain bottlenecks and la- bor shortages continued to limit businesses’ ability to meet strong demand. They judged that these challenges would likely last longer and be more widespread than previously thought. Participants generally expected global supply chain bottlenecks to persist well into next year at least. While several participants pointed to signs of incremental improvement in supply chains, a few oth- ers remarked that business contacts were experiencing deteriorating supply conditions that could be exacer- bated by the emergence of new variants of the virus. A couple of participants reported that some contacts were implementing permanent changes in their business mod- els to help weather current and future disruptions, in- cluding holding larger inventories or building domestic manufacturing capacity. Many business contacts contin- ued to experience difficulty hiring workers across all skill levels, noting the lack of qualified candidates as well. Some participants noted that businesses were offering higher wages, larger bonuses, or more flexible work ar- rangements to compete for workers. Participants judged that labor markets continued to strengthen, with the unemployment rate falling rapidly and payrolls growing at a solid pace. A few participants noted the recent decline in the unemployment rates of African Americans and Hispanics and the narrowing of the racial and ethnic gap in the prime-age employment- to-population ratio as suggesting a more inclusive labor market recovery. Some participants discussed the mod- est increase in the labor force participation rate in No- vember. A number of participants judged that a sub- stantial improvement in labor force participation would take longer than previously expected. A few others as- sessed that any further improvement in labor force par- ticipation would be quite modest. Participants cited a number of pandemic and economic factors likely de- pressing labor force participation, such as increased caregiving needs amid a shortage of workers in the care- giving industry, remaining concerns about the virus, and healthy balance sheets for households, including for those who retired early. A couple of participants cited factors that could support higher labor force participa- tion over the next few years, including waning fiscal stimulus; depleted savings, particularly for lower-income households; and the historical tendency for labor force participation to lag improvement in the labor market. Participants pointed to a number of signs that the U.S. labor market was very tight, including near-record rates Minutes of the Meeting of December 14–15, 2021Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ of quits and job vacancies, as well as a notable pickup in wage growth. In line with the recent data showing a rise in the employment cost index, many participants re- ported District business contacts either planning or hav- ing implemented larger wage increases to retain current employees or attract new workers. Participants generally noted that they were monitoring the incoming data for signs of inflationary pressures associated with the in- creasingly tight labor market. Acknowledging that the maximum level of employment consistent with price sta- bility may evolve over time, many participants saw the U.S. economy making rapid progress toward the Com- mittee’s maximum-employment goal. Several partici- pants viewed labor market conditions as already largely consistent with maximum employment. Participants remarked that inflation readings had been higher and were more persistent and widespread than previously anticipated. Some participants noted that trimmed mean measures of inflation had reached dec- ade-high levels and that the percentage of product cate- gories with substantial price increases continued to climb. While participants generally continued to antici- pate that inflation would decline significantly over the course of 2022 as supply constraints eased, almost all stated that they had revised up their forecasts of inflation for 2022 notably, and many did so for 2023 as well. In discussing their revisions to the inflation outlook, partic- ipants pointed to rising housing costs and rents, more widespread wage growth driven by labor shortages, and more prolonged global supply-side frictions, which could be exacerbated by the emergence of the Omicron variant. Moreover, participants widely cited business contacts feeling confident that they would be able to pass on higher costs of labor and material to customers. Participants noted their continuing attention to the pub- lic’s concern about the sizable increase in the cost of liv- ing that had taken place this year and the associated bur- den on U.S. households, particularly those who had lim- ited scope to pay higher prices for essential goods and services. In their comments on inflation expectations, some par- ticipants discussed the risk that recent elevated levels of inflation could increase the public’s longer-term expec- tations for inflation to a level above that consistent with the Committee’s longer-run inflation objective. They noted that the realization of such a development could make it harder for the Committee to achieve 2 percent inflation over the longer run. A couple of participants pointed to reports of higher inflation expectations of businesses and of increased use of cost-of-living adjust- ments in wage negotiations as early developments that could potentially affect the anchoring of inflation expec- tations. A few participants, however, noted that long- term inflation expectations remained well anchored, cit- ing stable readings of market-based inflation compensa- tion measures or the generally low level of longer-term bond yields. Participants observed that uncertainty about the eco- nomic outlook remained high. Most agreed that risks to inflation were weighted to the upside. Several partici- pants pointed to the possibility that structural factors that kept inflation low in the previous decade, such as technological changes, demographics, and the proximity of the ELB in an environment of low equilibrium inter- est rates, may reemerge when the effects of the pan- demic abate. A couple of others noted the risk that per- sistent real wage growth in excess of productivity growth could trigger inflationary wage–price dynamics. Partici- pants generally continued to stress uncertainties associ- ated with the labor market—in particular, the evolution of labor force participation—and with the length of time required to resolve the supply chain situation. Many par- ticipants noted that the pandemic, particularly new vari- ants of the virus, continued to pose downside risks to economic activity and upside risks to inflation. In their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the Federal Reserve’s commit- ment to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy during this challenging time, thereby promot- ing the Committee’s statutory goals of maximum em- ployment and price stability. Participants discussed the progress the economy had made toward the criteria the Committee had specified in its forward guidance for the federal funds rate. Participants agreed that the Commit- tee’s criteria of inflation rising to 2 percent and moder- ately exceeding 2 percent for some time had been more than met. All participants remarked that inflation had continued to run notably above 2 percent, reflecting sup- ply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy. With respect to the max- imum-employment criterion, participants noted that the labor market had been making rapid progress as meas- ured by a variety of indicators, including solid job gains reported in recent months, a substantial further decline in a range of unemployment rates to levels well below those prevailing a year ago, and a labor force participa- tion rate that had recently edged up. Many participants judged that, if the current pace of improvement contin- ued, labor markets would fast approach maximum em- ployment. Several participants remarked that they viewed labor market conditions as already largely con- sistent with maximum employment. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ In support of the Committee’s goals of maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, participants judged that it would be appro- priate for the Committee to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the Com- mittee’s assessments of maximum employment, a condi- tion most participants judged could be met relatively soon if the recent pace of labor market improvements continued. A few participants remarked that maximum employment consistent with price stability evolves over time and that further improvements in labor markets were likely over subsequent years as the economy con- tinued to expand. Some participants also remarked that there could be circumstances in which it would be ap- propriate for the Committee to raise the target range for the federal funds rate before maximum employment had been fully achieved—for example, if the Committee judged that its employment and price-stability goals were not complementary in light of economic developments and that inflation pressures and inflation expectations were moving materially and persistently higher in a way that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s longer-run goals. In light of elevated inflation pressures and the strength- ening labor market, participants judged that the increase in policy accommodation provided by the ongoing pace of net asset purchases was no longer necessary. They remarked that a quicker conclusion of net asset pur- chases would better position the Committee to set policy to address the full range of plausible economic out- comes. Participants judged that it would be appropriate to double the pace of the ongoing reduction in net asset purchases. Such a change would result in reducing the monthly pace of net purchases of Treasury securities by $20 billion and of agency MBS by $10 billion starting in January. Participants also expected that economic con- ditions would evolve in a manner such that similar re- ductions in the pace of net asset purchases would be ap- propriate each subsequent month, resulting in an end to net asset purchases in mid-March, a few months sooner than participants had anticipated at the November FOMC meeting. In addition, participants remarked that the Committee should continue to be prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the eco- nomic outlook. Participants continued to stress that maintaining flexibil- ity to implement appropriate policy adjustments on the basis of risk-management considerations should be a guiding principle in conducting policy in the current highly uncertain environment. Participants generally noted that, given their individual outlooks for the econ- omy, the labor market, and inflation, it may become war- ranted to increase the federal funds rate sooner or at a faster pace than participants had earlier anticipated. Some participants also noted that it could be appropriate to begin to reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal- ance sheet relatively soon after beginning to raise the federal funds rate. Some participants judged that a less accommodative future stance of policy would likely be warranted and that the Committee should convey a strong commitment to address elevated inflation pres- sures. These participants noted, however, that a meas- ured approach to tightening policy would help enable the Committee to assess incoming data and be in posi- tion to react to the full range of plausible economic out- comes. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. They noted that the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but continued to be affected by COVID-19. Job gains had been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate had de- clined substantially. They remarked that supply and de- mand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reo- pening of the economy had continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. Overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Members also acknowledged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vac- cinations and an easing of supply constraints were ex- pected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation, but risks to the economic outlook remained, including from new variants of the virus. As elevated inflation had persisted for longer than they had previously anticipated, members agreed that it was appropriate to remove the reference to “transitory” fac- tors affecting inflation in the postmeeting statement and instead note that supply and demand imbalances have continued to contribute to elevated inflation. Members also agreed that, with the emergence of the Omicron variant, it was appropriate to note the risk of new vari- ants of the virus in their assessment of risks to the eco- nomic outlook. Minutes of the Meeting of December 14–15, 2021Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Members agreed that the Federal Reserve was commit- ted to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. All members reaffirmed their commitment to seek to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. Members agreed that the postmeeting statement should be updated to reflect the Committee’s assessment of the progress the economy had made toward the criteria specified in its forward guidance for the target range for the federal funds rate. They agreed that the inflation cri- teria in the guidance had been met and that the postmeeting statement should note that with inflation having exceeded 2 percent for some time, the Commit- tee expected that it would be appropriate to maintain the current target range of 0 to ¼ percent until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the Com- mittee’s assessments of maximum employment. In light of inflation developments and the further im- provement in the labor market, members decided to re- duce the monthly pace of the Federal Reserve’s net asset purchases by $20 billion for Treasury securities and $10 billion for agency MBS. Specifically, beginning in January, the Committee would increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $40 billion per month and of agency MBS by at least $20 billion per month. Mem- bers also agreed that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases would likely be appropriate in subse- quent months, implying that increases in the Federal Re- serve’s securities holdings would cease by mid-March under the Committee’s outlook, a few months sooner than had been anticipated at the previous meeting. Members noted that the Committee was prepared to ad- just the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook and that it was important to maintain the flexibility to adjust the stance of policy as appropriate in response to changes in the Committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation. Members also noted that the Federal Reserve’s ongoing asset purchases and hold- ings of securities would continue to foster smooth mar- ket functioning and accommodative financial condi- tions, thereby supporting the flow of credit. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. They also concurred that, in as- sessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in ac- cordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective December 16, 2021, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to:  Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent.  Complete the increase in System Open Market Account (SOMA) holdings of Treasury securities by $60 billion and of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $30 billion, as indicated in the monthly purchase plans released in mid-December.   Increase the SOMA holdings of Treasury securities by $40 billion and of agency MBS by $20 billion, during the monthly purchase period beginning in mid-January. Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by additional amounts as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities.  Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate opera- tion limit of $500 billion; the aggregate op- eration limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty the limit of $160 billion per day; per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS.  Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “The Federal Reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the U.S. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. With progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months but continue to be affected by COVID-19. Job gains have been solid in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate has declined substantially. Supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. Overall financial conditions remain accommo- dative, in part reflecting policy measures to sup- port the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccina- tions and an easing of supply constraints are ex- pected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation. Risks to the economic outlook re- main, including from new variants of the virus. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. With inflation having exceeded 2 percent for some time, the Committee expects it will be ap- propriate to maintain this target range until la- bor market conditions have reached levels con- sistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment. In light of inflation de- velopments and the further improvement in the labor market, the Committee decided to reduce the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $20 billion for Treasury securities and $10 bil- lion for agency mortgage-backed securities. Be- ginning in January, the Committee will increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $40 billion per month and of agency mort- gage-backed securities by at least $20 billion per month. The Committee judges that similar re- ductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, but it is pre- pared to adjust the pace of purchases if war- ranted by changes in the economic outlook. The Federal Reserve’s ongoing purchases and holdings of securities will continue to foster smooth market functioning and accommoda- tive financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Charles L. Evans, Randal K. Quarles, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective De- cember 16, 2021. The Board also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective December 16, 2021. Minutes of the Meeting of December 14–15, 2021Page 13_____________________________________________________________________________________________ At the end of the meeting, the Chair noted that the Board’s staff had made substantial progress in develop- ing formal polices to implement the tough and compre- hensive ethics rules for senior officials that were an- nounced in October. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 25–26, 2022. The meeting adjourned at 11:00 a.m. on Decem- ber 15, 2021. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on November 23, 2021, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on November 2–3, 2021. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 



Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee January 25–26, 2022 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held by videoconference on Tuesday, Janu- ary 25, 2022, at 9:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, January 26, 2022, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Esther L. George Loretta J. Mester Christopher J. Waller Meredith Black, Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Naureen Hassan, and Neel Kashkari, Alternate Members of the Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively Kenneth C. Montgomery, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Brian M. Doyle, Carlos Garriga, Joseph W. Gruber, David E. Lebow, Ellis W. Tallman, Geoffrey Tootell, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Jon Faust and Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Advisers to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board Antulio N. Bomfim, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, and Nitish R. Sinha, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Stephanie E. Curcuru,2 Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board; Eric C. Engstrom and Christopher J. Gust, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Erik A. Heitfield, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Laura Lipscomb and Zeynep Senyuz,2 Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 2 Attended through the discussion of principles for reducing the size of the balance sheet. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Etienne Gagnon2 and Andrew Meldrum, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Deborah Leonard2 and Rania Perry,2 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Mark A. Carlson, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board James Dolmas, Economic Policy Adviser and Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Alyssa G. Anderson and Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board Alyssa Arute, Manager, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Camille Bryan, Senior Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Damjan Pfajfar, Mary Tian, and Randall A. Williams, Group Managers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board David B. Cashin, Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Erin E. Ferris, Kyungmin Kim, and Bernd Schlusche,2 Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Colin J. Hottman, Principal Economist, Division of International Finance, Board David Na,2 Senior Financial Institution and Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Isaiah C. Ahn, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, and Sylvain Leduc, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, and San Francisco, respectively Anne Baum, John Clark,2 Spencer Krane, Paolo A. Pesenti, Julie Ann Remache,2 Keith Sill, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, New York, Chicago, New York, New York, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. Radhika Mithal,2 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Annual Organizational Matters4 The agenda for this meeting reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate mem- bers of the Federal Open Market Committee for a term beginning January 25, 2022, were received and that these individuals executed their oaths of office. The elected members and alternate members were as fol- lows: John C. Williams, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with Naureen Hassan, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate Patrick Harker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, as alternate Loretta J. Mester, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, with Charles L. Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate James Bullard, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, with Meredith Black, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, as alternate Esther L. George, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, with Neel Kashkari, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as alternate. By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Com- mittee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2023: Jerome H. Powell John C. Williams James A. Clouse Matthew M. Luecke Brian J. Bonis Michelle A. Smith Mark E. Van Der Weide General Counsel Michael Held Richard M. Ashton Chair Vice Chair Secretary Deputy Secretary Assistant Secretary Assistant Secretary Deputy General Counsel Assistant General Counsel 4 Committee organizational documents are available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_authoriza- tions.htm. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Trevor Reeve Stacey Tevlin Beth Anne Wilson Shaghil Ahmed Brian M. Doyle Carlos Garriga Joseph W. Gruber Beverly Hirtle David E. Lebow Ellis W. Tallman Geoffrey Tootell William Wascher Economist Economist Economist Associate Economists By unanimous vote, the Committee selected the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account (SOMA). By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Lorie K. Logan and Patricia Zobel to serve at the pleasure of the Committee as manager and deputy manager of the SOMA, respectively, on the understanding that these se- lections were subject to being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Secretary’s note: The Federal Reserve Bank of New York subsequently sent advice that the manager and deputy manager selections indi- cated previously were satisfactory. By unanimous vote, the Committee voted to reaffirm without revision the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations, as shown below. By unanimous vote, the Committee voted to reaffirm without revision the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations and to amend the Foreign Currency Directive to remove ref- erences to the temporary dollar liquidity swap arrange- ments with foreign central banks, as shown below. The Guidelines for the Conduct of System Open Market Op- erations in Federal-Agency Issues remained suspended. AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS (As reaffirmed effective January 25, 2022) OPEN MARKET TRANSACTIONS 1. The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com- mittee”) authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee to execute open market trans- actions (the “Selected Bank”), to the extent necessary to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted by the Committee: A. To buy or sell in the open market securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to prin- cipal and interest by, the United States, and securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the United States, that are eligible for purchase or sale under Sec- tion 14(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (“Eligible Secu- rities”) for the System Open Market Account (“SOMA”): i. As an outright operation with securities dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained at the Selected Bank: on a same-day or deferred de- livery basis (including such transactions as are com- monly referred to as dollar rolls and coupon swaps) at market prices; or ii. As a temporary operation: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis, to purchase such Eligible Se- curities subject to an agreement to resell (“repo transactions”) or to sell such Eligible Securities sub- ject to an agreement to repurchase (“reverse repo transactions”) for a term of 65 business days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise authorized by the Committee, are determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual counterparties; B. To allow Eligible Securities in the SOMA to ma- ture without replacement; C. To exchange, at market prices, in connection with a Treasury auction, maturing Eligible Securities in the SOMA with the Treasury, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct obligations of the United States or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States; and D. To exchange, at market prices, maturing Eligible Securities in the SOMA with an agency of the United States, in the case of Eligible Securities that are direct obligations of that agency or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by that agency. SECURITIES LENDING 2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, the Committee authorizes the Se- lected Bank to operate a program to lend Eligible Secu- rities held in the SOMA to dealers on an overnight basis (except that the Selected Bank may lend Eligible Securi- ties for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions). Such securities lending must be: A. i. ii. objectives of the program; At rates determined by competitive bidding; At a minimum lending fee consistent with the _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 25–26, 2022Page 3 Subject to reasonable limitations on the total iii. amount of a specific issue of Eligible Securities that may be auctioned; and iv. limitations on the amount of Eligible Securities that each borrower may borrow. Subject to reasonable B. The Selected Bank may: i. Reject bids that, as determined in its sole dis- cretion, could facilitate a bidder’s ability to control a single issue; ii. Accept Treasury securities or cash as collateral for any loan of securities authorized in this para- graph 2; and iii. Accept agency securities as collateral only for a loan of agency securities authorized in this para- graph 2. OPERATIONAL READINESS TESTING 3. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to undertake transactions of the type described in para- graphs 1 and 2 from time to time for the purpose of test- ing operational readiness, subject to the following limi- tations: A. All transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 shall be conducted with prior notice to the Commit- tee; B. The aggregate par value of the transactions au- thorized in this paragraph 3 that are of the type de- scribed in paragraph 1.A.i, 1.B, 1.C and 1.D shall not exceed $5 billion per calendar year; and C. The outstanding amount of the transactions de- scribed in paragraphs 1.A.ii and 2 shall not exceed $5 billion at any given time. TRANSACTIONS WITH CUSTOMER ACCOUNTS In order to ensure the effective conduct of open 4. market operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments or other authorized services for foreign central bank and international accounts main- tained at a Federal Reserve Bank (the “Foreign Ac- counts”) and accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States pursuant to sec- tion 15 of the Federal Reserve Act (together with the Foreign Accounts, the “Customer Accounts”), the Com- mittee authorizes the following when undertaken on terms comparable to those available in the open market: A. The Selected Bank, for the SOMA, to: Undertake reverse repo transactions in Eligible i. Securities held in the SOMA with the Customer Ac- counts for a term of 65 business days or less; and ii. Undertake repo transactions in Eligible Securi- ties with Foreign Accounts; and B. Any Federal Reserve Bank that maintains Cus- tomer Accounts, for any such Customer Account, when appropriate and subject to all other necessary authorization and approvals, to: i. Undertake repo transactions in Eligible Securi- ties with dealers with a corresponding reverse repo transaction in such Eligible Securities with the Cus- tomer Accounts; and ii. Undertake intra-day repo transactions in Eligi- ble Securities with Foreign Accounts. Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts un- der the provisions of this paragraph 4 may provide for a service fee when appropriate. Transactions undertaken with Customer Accounts are also subject to the authori- zation or approval of other entities, including the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and, when involving accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank as fiscal agent of the United States, the United States Department of the Treasury. ADDITIONAL MATTERS The Committee authorizes the Chair of the Com- 5. mittee, in fostering the Committee’s objectives during any period between meetings of the Committee, to in- struct the Selected Bank to act on behalf of the Commit- tee to: A. Adjust somewhat in exceptional circumstances the stance of monetary policy and to take actions that may result in material changes in the composition and size of the assets in the SOMA; or B. Undertake transactions with respect to Eligible Securities in order to appropriately address temporary disruptions of an operational or highly unusual nature in U.S. dollar funding markets. Any such adjustment described in subparagraph A of this paragraph 5 shall be made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and decision about the stance of policy at its most recent meeting and the Committee’s long-run objectives to foster maximum employment and price stability, and shall be based on economic, financial, and monetary developments since the most recent meet- ing of the Committee. The Chair, whenever feasible, will consult with the Committee before making any instruc- tion under this paragraph 5. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS (As reaffirmed effective January 25, 2022) IN GENERAL The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Com- 1. mittee”) authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank selected by the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to execute open market transactions for the System Open Market Ac- count as provided in this Authorization, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee: A. To purchase and sell foreign currencies (also known as cable transfers) at home and abroad in the open market, including with the United States Treas- ury, with foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank for International Settlements, and with other entities in the open market. This authorization to purchase and sell foreign currencies encompasses purchases and sales through standalone spot or forward transactions and through foreign exchange swap transactions. For purposes of this Authorization, foreign exchange swap transactions are: swap transactions with the United States Treasury (also known as warehousing transactions), swap transactions with other central banks under reciprocal currency arrangements, swap transactions with other central banks understanding dollar liquidity and foreign currency liquidity swap ar- rangements, and swap transactions with other entities in the open market. B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding for- ward contracts to receive or to deliver, foreign curren- cies. 2. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall, unless otherwise authorized by the Committee, be conducted: In a manner consistent with the obligations re- A. garding exchange arrangements under Article IV of the Articles of Agreement of the International Mone- tary Fund (IMF).1 In close and continuous cooperation and consul- B. tation, as appropriate, with the United States Treasury. C. In consultation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities, foreign central banks, and inter- national monetary institutions. D. At prevailing market rates. STANDALONE SPOT AND FORWARD TRANS- ACTIONS For any operation that involves standalone spot or 3. forward transactions in foreign currencies: A. Approval of such operation is required as fol- lows: i. The Committee must direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and for- ward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Authorization, exceeding $5 billion since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the Committee. The Foreign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”) must direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the opera- tion if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the Committee is not feasible in the time avail- able. ii. The Committee authorizes the Subcommittee to direct the Selected Bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.C of this Au- thorization, totaling $5 billion or less since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the Commit- tee. Such an operation also shall be: Generally directed at countering disorderly B. i. market conditions; or ii. Undertaken to adjust System balances in light of probable future needs for currencies; or iii. Conducted for such other purposes as may be determined by the Committee. C. For purposes of this Authorization, the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregard- ing signs) of the dollar values of individual foreign cur- rencies purchased and sold, valued at the time of the transaction. WAREHOUSING The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank, with 4. the prior approval of the Subcommittee and at the re- quest of the United States Treasury, to conduct swap transactions with the United States Exchange Stabiliza- tion Fund established by section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934 under agreements in which the Selected Bank purchases foreign currencies from the Exchange Stabilization Fund and the Exchange Stabilization Fund repurchases the foreign currencies from the Selected _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 25–26, 2022Page 5 Bank at a later date (such purchases and sales also known as warehousing). RECIPROCAL CURRENCY ARRANGEMENTS, AND STANDING DOLLAR AND FOREIGN CUR- RENCY LIQUIDITY SWAPS The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to 5. maintain reciprocal currency arrangements established under the North American Framework Agreement, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements as provided in this Authorization and to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee. A. For reciprocal currency arrangements all draw- ings must be approved in advance by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee be- lieves that consultation with the Committee is not fea- sible in the time available). For standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap B. arrangements all drawings must be approved in ad- vance by the Chair. The Chair may approve a schedule of potential drawings, and may delegate to the man- ager, System Open Market Account, the authority to approve individual drawings that occur according to the schedule approved by the Chair. C. For standing foreign currency liquidity swap ar- rangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the Committee (or by the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes that consultation with the Committee is not feasible in the time available). D. Operations involving standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements and standing for- eign currency liquidity swap arrangements shall gener- ally be directed at countering strains in financial mar- kets in the United States or abroad, or reducing the risk that they could emerge, so as to mitigate their ef- fects on economic and financial conditions in the United States. For reciprocal currency arrangements, standing E. and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements: All arrangements are subject to annual review Any new arrangements must be approved by i. and approval by the Committee; ii. the Committee; and iii. Any changes in the terms of existing arrange- ments must be approved in advance by the Chair. The Chair shall keep the Committee informed of any changes in terms, and the terms shall be con- sistent with principles discussed with and guidance provided by the Committee. OTHER OPERATIONS IN FOREIGN CURREN- CIES Any other operations in foreign currencies for 6. which governance is not otherwise specified in this Au- thorization (such as foreign exchange swap transactions with private-sector counterparties) must be authorized and directed in advance by the Committee. FOREIGN CURRENCY HOLDINGS 7. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to hold foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac- count in accounts maintained at foreign central banks, the Bank for International Settlements, and such other foreign institutions as approved by the Board of Gover- nors under Section 214.5 of Regulation N, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the Committee. A. The Selected Bank shall manage all holdings of foreign currencies for the System Open Market Ac- count: i. Primarily, to ensure sufficient liquidity to ena- ble the Selected Bank to conduct foreign currency operations as directed by the Committee; ii. safety; iii. Subject to paragraphs 7.A.i and 7.A.ii, to pro- vide the highest rate of return possible in each cur- rency; and iv. To achieve such other objectives as may be au- thorized by the Committee. Secondarily, to maintain a high degree of B. The Selected Bank may manage such foreign cur- rency holdings by: i. Purchasing and selling obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, a foreign government or agency thereof (“Permitted Foreign Securities”) through outright purchases and sales; ii. Purchasing Permitted Foreign Securities under agreements for repurchase of such Permitted For- eign Securities and selling such securities under agreements for the resale of such securities; and iii. Managing balances in various time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions approved by the Board of Governors under Regulation N. C. The Subcommittee, in consultation with the Committee, may provide additional instructions to the Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Selected Bank regarding holdings of foreign curren- cies. ADDITIONAL MATTERS 8. The Committee authorizes the Chair: A. With the prior approval of the Committee, to en- ter into any needed agreement or understanding with the Secretary of the United States Treasury about the division of responsibility for foreign currency opera- tions between the System and the United States Treas- ury; B. To advise the Secretary of the United States Treasury concerning System foreign currency opera- tions, and to consult with the Secretary on policy mat- ters relating to foreign currency operations; C. To designate Federal Reserve System persons au- thorized to communicate with the United States Treasury concerning System Open Market Account foreign currency operations; and D. From time to time, to transmit appropriate re- ports and information to the National Advisory Coun- cil on International Monetary and Financial Policies. 9. The Committee authorizes the Selected Bank to undertake transactions of the type described in this Au- thorization, and foreign exchange and investment transactions that it may be otherwise authorized to undertake, from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness. The aggregate amount of such transactions shall not exceed $2.5 billion per calendar year. These transactions shall be conducted with prior notice to the Committee. 10. All Federal Reserve banks shall participate in the foreign currency operations for System Open Market Account in accordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Governors’ Statement of Procedure with Re- spect to Foreign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated January 1, 1944. 11. Any authority of the Subcommittee pursuant to this Authorization may be exercised by the Chair if the Chair believes that consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time available. The Chair shall promptly report to the Subcommittee any action ap- proved by the Chair pursuant to this paragraph. 12. The Committee authorizes the Chair, in excep- tional circumstances where it would not be feasible to convene the Committee, to foster the Committee’s ob- jectives by instructing the Selected Bank to engage in foreign currency operations not otherwise authorized pursuant to this Authorization. Any such action shall be made in the context of the Committee’s discussion and decisions regarding foreign currency operations. The Chair, whenever feasible, will consult with the Commit- tee before making any instruction under this paragraph. __________________________ 1 In general, as specified in Article IV, each member of the IMF undertakes to collaborate with the IMF and other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates. These obligations include seeking to direct the member’s economic and financial policies toward the objective of fostering orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability. These obligations also include avoiding manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in such a way that would impede effective balance of payments adjustment or to give an unfair competitive advantage over other members. FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE (As amended effective January 25, 2022) The Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank 1. selected by the Committee (the “Selected Bank”) to ex- ecute open market transactions, for the System Open Market Account, in accordance with the provisions of the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations (the “Authorization”) and subject to the limits in this Di- rective. 2. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to exe- cute warehousing transactions, if so requested by the United States Treasury and if approved by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee (the “Subcommittee”), subject to the limitation that the outstanding balance of United States dollars provided to the United States Treasury as a result of these transactions not at any time exceed $5 billion. 3. tain, for the System Open Market Account: The Committee directs the Selected Bank to main- A. Reciprocal currency arrangements with the fol- lowing foreign central banks: Foreign central bank Maximum amount (millions of dollars or equivalent) 2,000 3,000 Bank of Canada Bank of Mexico Standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements with B. the following foreign central banks: Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 25–26, 2022Page 7 Standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrange- C. ments with the following foreign central banks: Bank of Canada Bank of England Bank of Japan European Central Bank Swiss National Bank 4. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to hold and to invest foreign currencies in the portfolio in ac- cordance with the provisions of paragraph 7 of the Au- thorization. 5. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to report to the Committee, at each regular meeting of the Com- mittee, on transactions undertaken pursuant to para- graphs 1 and 6 of the Authorization. The Selected Bank is also directed to provide quarterly reports to the Com- mittee regarding the management of the foreign cur- rency holdings pursuant to paragraph 7 of the Authori- zation. 6. The Committee directs the Selected Bank to con- duct testing of transactions for the purpose of opera- tional readiness in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9 of the Authorization. The Committee voted unanimously to approve with minor revisions the Standing Repurchase Agreement Fa- cility Resolution, as shown below. All but one member of the Committee voted to approve with minor revisions the Standing FIMA Repurchase Agreement Resolution. Governor Bowman abstained from the vote on the Standing FIMA Repurchase Agreement Resolution. The resolutions were modified to remove references to a specific facility rate to allow for normal adjustment in the facility rates when the Committee makes changes to the target range for the federal funds rate. STANDING REPURCHASE AGREEMENT FACIL- ITY RESOLUTION (As amended effective January 25, 2022) The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Commit- tee”) authorizes and directs the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (the “Selected Bank”), for the System Open Market Account (“SOMA”), to conduct operations in which it offers to purchase securities, subject to an agreement to resell (“repurchase agreement transactions”). The repurchase agreement transactions hereby authorized and directed shall (i) include only U.S. Treasury securities, agency debt securities, and agency mortgage-backed securities; (ii) be conducted as open market operations with pri- mary dealers and depository institutions as participants; (iii) be conducted with a minimum bid rate set at a level directed by the Committee; (iv) be offered on an over- night basis (except that the Open Market Desk at the Selected Bank may extend the term for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions); and (v) be subject to an ag- gregate operation limit of $500 billion. The aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the dis- cretion of the Chair. These operations shall be con- ducted by the Open Market Desk at the Selected Bank until otherwise directed by the Committee. STANDING FIMA REPURCHASE AGREEMENT RESOLUTION (As amended effective January 25, 2022) The Federal Open Market Committee (the “Commit- tee”) authorizes and directs the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (the “Selected Bank”), for the System Open Market Account (“SOMA”), to offer to purchase U.S. Treasury securities subject to an agreement to resell (“repurchase agreement transactions”) with foreign central bank and interna- tional accounts maintained at a Federal Reserve Bank (the “Foreign Accounts”). The repurchase agreement transactions hereby authorized and directed shall (i) in- clude only U.S. Treasury securities; (ii) be conducted with Foreign Accounts approved in advance by the For- eign Currency Subcommittee (the ”Subcommittee”); (iii) be conducted at an offering rate equal to the minimum bid rate for the standing repurchase agreement facility unless the Subcommittee establishes a different offering rate; (iv) be offered on an overnight basis (except that the Open Market Desk at the Selected Bank may extend the term for longer than an overnight term to accommo- date weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions); and (v) be subject to a per-counterparty limit of $60 bil- lion per day. The Subcommittee may approve changes in the offering rate, the maturity of the transactions, eli- gible Foreign Accounts counterparties (either by ap- proving or removing account access), and the counter- party limit; and the Subcommittee shall keep the Com- mittee informed of any such changes. These transac- tions shall be undertaken by the Open Market Desk at the Selected Bank until otherwise directed by the Com- mittee. The Open Market Desk at the Selected Bank will also report at least annually to the Committee on facility usage and the list of approved account holders. Regarding the tough and comprehensive ethics rules for senior officials that were announced in October, the Chair indicated that staff were working through com- ments received from policymakers and were aiming to Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ circulate a new draft soon. Noting the urgency in bring- ing the new policy to completion, the Chair proposed that the Committee vote on a final draft as soon in the intermeeting period as possible. In the Committee’s annual reconsideration of the State- ment on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strat- egy, all participants supported the statement as written, and the Committee voted unanimously to reaffirm with- out revision. In discussing the statement, the Chair noted that, con- sistent with previous communications, a formal frame- work review would commence in 2024 and conclude in 2025. That timing would allow perspectives on recent events to inform considerations of potential revisions to the framework. STATEMENT ON LONGER-RUN GOALS AND MONETARY POLICY STRATEGY (As reaffirmed effective January 25, 2022) The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the Congress of promoting maximum employment, sta- ble prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. The Committee seeks to explain its monetary policy deci- sions to the public as clearly as possible. Such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncer- tainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. Employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and finan- cial disturbances. Monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to these dis- turbances. The Committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee judges that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. Therefore, the federal funds rate is likely to be con- strained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past. Owing in part to the proximity of in- terest rates to the effective lower bound, the Committee judges that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. The Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor mar- ket. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to spec- ify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, rec- ognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily de- termined by monetary policy, and hence the Committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expendi- tures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. The Committee judges that longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and mod- erate long-term interest rates and enhance the Commit- tee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently be- low 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. Monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks over time to mit- igate shortfalls of employment from the Committee’s as- sessment of its maximum level and deviations of infla- tion from its longer-run goal. Moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability de- pends on a stable financial system. Therefore, the Com- mittee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the bal- ance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. However, under circum- stances in which the Committee judges that the objec- tives are not complementary, it takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employ- ment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. The Committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organi- zational meeting each January, and to undertake roughly _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 25–26, 2022Page 9 every five years a thorough public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Financial Developments and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a review of domestic finan- cial market developments over the intermeeting period. Treasury yields rose across the curve, led by higher real yields. Expectations for tighter monetary policy ahead, as well as an easing of COVID-related concerns, were cited as contributing to the increase in yields. The S&P 500 index declined around 5 percent, with sharp moves toward the end of the period, reportedly prompted by concerns about the implications of a tighter path of monetary policy and rising geopolitical risks. Regarding the monetary policy outlook, with data show- ing continuing tightening of labor market conditions and elevated inflationary pressures, policymaker communi- cations were perceived as pointing to an earlier and faster removal of accommodation than market partici- pants had previously expected. Against this backdrop, respondents to the Open Market Desk’s surveys of pri- mary dealers and market participants almost uniformly projected that the Federal Reserve’s net asset purchases would end by mid-March. The median survey projec- tion for the commencement of balance sheet runoff shifted into the third quarter of this year, roughly a year and a half sooner than in the December surveys. Most survey respondents also expected the portfolio to de- cline at a significantly faster pace than they did in De- cember. Expectations for the path of the federal funds rate shifted toward earlier rate increases, and interest rate fu- tures priced in an increase in the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at the March FOMC meeting. On aver- age, respondents to the Desk surveys assigned a roughly 70 percent probability to an increase in the target range in March. The expected path of the federal funds rate in the Desk surveys and derived from interest rate futures also steepened over the period. The median survey pro- jection for the most likely level of the target range at the end of 2024 was about 2 percent, similar to December. Nonetheless, survey respondents attached significant probability to outcomes in which the target range moved up more than indicated by the projected modal path. Changing views about the likely path of the Federal Re- serve’s balance sheet following the release of the Decem- ber FOMC minutes seemed to affect longer-term yields. Far forward real yields moved higher over the period, with much of the increase following the release of the minutes for the December FOMC meeting. In addition, agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) spreads wid- ened notably after having been stable at low levels for the past year, reportedly driven by expectations for an earlier and faster runoff of agency MBS than had been expected. The manager turned next to a discussion of international financial market developments. Sovereign yields in- creased across advanced foreign economies (AFEs), re- portedly driven by receding concerns about the Omi- cron variant, elevated inflation readings, and, relatedly, expectations that central banks would remove policy ac- commodation sooner than had been expected. Several central banks concluded their net asset purchases late last year, and more were expected to do so this year. On the outlook for policy rates, several central banks had either already increased their policy rates or were ex- pected to do so later this year. The manager provided an update on issues related to monetary policy implementation. Reductions in the pace of the Committee’s net asset purchases had pro- ceeded smoothly to date and functioning in Treasury and agency MBS markets remained stable. Regarding the potential for the Committee to reduce System Open Market Account (SOMA) holdings in the future, market participants generally anticipated that SOMA redemp- tions could proceed smoothly at a somewhat faster pace than during the previous period of balance sheet reduc- tion from 2017 to 2019. However, some also noted that SOMA redemptions would require significant adjust- ments to private-sector balance sheets, as investors ab- sorb the net increase in Treasury and agency MBS issu- ance to the private sector and money markets transition to lower levels of liquidity, and that these adjustments could take some time. The manager discussed expectations for the evolution of the Federal Reserve’s administered rates in connection with a potential future change in the target range for the federal funds rate. The Desk survey responses suggested expectations for administered rates to be raised by the same increment as the target range for the federal funds rate. The manager noted that the current setting of ad- ministered rates relative to the target range had been working well and anticipated that it could continue to support effective policy implementation following any increase in the target range in coming months, although adjustments could be warranted over time. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. No Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the System’s account during the intermeeting period. Principles for Reducing the Size of the Balance Sheet Participants continued their discussion of topics associ- ated with potential adjustments in the Committee’s pol- icy tools that may be appropriate to support the achieve- ment of sustained strong labor market conditions and a return of inflation to levels consistent with the Commit- tee’s longer-run 2 percent objective under a wide range of circumstances. At this meeting, participants dis- cussed high-level principles that could be released to the public to describe the Committee’s approach for reduc- ing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. They agreed that the principles would address, at a high level, the sequence of adjustments in the interest rate and bal- ance sheet tools to reduce policy accommodation, the Committee’s approach to balance sheet runoff, and its intentions for the longer-run size and composition of the balance sheet. The participants’ discussion was pre- ceded by a staff presentation that reviewed key consid- erations raised by participants at the December FOMC meeting and examined how the proposed set of princi- ples, which reflected those considerations, compared with the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans is- sued in 2014. In their discussion, participants reaffirmed that changes in the target range for the federal funds rate are the Com- mittee’s primary means for adjusting the stance of mon- etary policy, as noted in the Committee’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. Par- ticipants judged that the timing and pace of balance sheet reduction would be determined so as to promote the Committee’s maximum-employment and price-sta- bility goals and that it would be appropriate to begin the process of reducing the size of the balance sheet after the process of increasing the target range for the federal funds rate has begun. While participants agreed that de- tails on the timing and pace of balance sheet runoff would be determined at upcoming meetings, participants generally noted that current economic and financial con- ditions would likely warrant a faster pace of balance sheet runoff than during the period of balance sheet re- duction from 2017 to 2019. Participants observed that, in light of the current high level of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, a significant reduction in the size of the balance sheet would likely be appropriate. Partici- pants noted that the level of securities holdings con- sistent with implementing monetary policy efficiently and effectively in an ample reserves regime was uncer- tain and probably would remain so. Consequently, mar- ket conditions would have to be monitored closely to determine the appropriate longer-run level of reserves and the size of the balance sheet. Participants agreed that the Committee should reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings over time in a predictable manner primarily by adjusting the amounts reinvested of principal payments received from securi- ties held in the SOMA. They also agreed that the SOMA should hold primarily Treasury securities in the longer run. Regarding these two principles, many participants commented that sales of agency MBS or reinvesting some portion of principal payments received from agency MBS into Treasury securities may be appropriate at some point in the future to enable suitable progress toward a longer-run SOMA portfolio composition con- sisting primarily of Treasury securities. Participants agreed that it was appropriate at this time for the Committee to publish its high-level principles for reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. They also agreed that it was important for the Commit- tee to retain the flexibility to adjust any of the details of its approach in light of changing economic and financial conditions. Participants noted that the principles would serve as an important guide in future deliberations on balance sheet reduction. While no decisions regarding specific details for reducing the size of the balance sheet were made at this meeting, participants agreed to con- tinue their discussions at upcoming meetings. Following the conclusion of the discussion, all partici- pants supported the proposed principles for reducing the size of the balance sheet. The Committee voted unanimously to adopt the Principles for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, as shown below. PRINCIPLES FOR REDUCING THE SIZE OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE’S BALANCE SHEET (As adopted effective January 25, 2022) The Federal Open Market Committee agreed that it is appropriate at this time to provide information regard- ing its planned approach for significantly reducing the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. All partici- pants agreed on the following elements: • The Committee views changes in the target range for the federal funds rate as its pri- mary means of adjusting the stance of mon- etary policy. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 25–26, 2022Page 11 • The Committee will determine the timing and pace of reducing the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet so as to promote its maximum employment and price stability goals. The Committee expects that reduc- ing the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet will commence after the process of in- creasing the target range for the federal funds rate has begun. • The Committee intends to reduce the Fed- eral Reserve's securities holdings over time in a predictable manner primarily by adjust- ing the amounts reinvested of principal pay- ments received from securities held in the System Open Market Account (SOMA). • Over time, the Committee intends to main- tain securities holdings in amounts needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample reserves regime. • In the longer run, the Committee intends to hold primarily Treasury securities in the SOMA, thereby minimizing the effect of Federal Reserve holdings on the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy. • The Committee is prepared to adjust any of the details of its approach to reducing the size of the balance sheet in light of eco- nomic and financial developments. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the January 25– 26 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic prod- uct (GDP) growth had picked up in the fourth quarter after slowing in the third quarter. Labor market condi- tions improved further in December, and indicators of labor compensation continued to show robust increases. Consumer price inflation through November—as meas- ured by the 12-month percentage change in the price in- dex for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)—re- mained elevated. Total nonfarm payroll employment posted a moderate gain in December. The unemployment rate declined from 4.2 percent in November to 3.9 percent in Decem- ber. The unemployment rate for African Americans moved higher, and the Hispanic unemployment rate de- clined; both rates remained well above the national aver- age. The labor force participation rate was unchanged in December, and the employment-to-population ratio moved up. The private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Sur- vey, moved down in November but remained well above pre-pandemic levels; the quits rate was also elevated. Weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls, constructed by the Board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor ADP that were available through the first half of January, pointed to a slower pace of private employ- ment gains relative to December. Average hourly earn- ings rose at an annual rate of 6.2 percent over the last three months of the year; although wage increases were widespread across industries, they were particularly no- table in the leisure and hospitality sector as well as the transportation and warehousing sector. Inflation readings remained high, and various indicators suggested that inflationary pressures had broadened over the second half of 2021. Total PCE price inflation was 5.7 percent over the 12 months ending in Novem- ber, and core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.7 percent over the same period. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE inflation con- structed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 2.8 percent in November, 1 percentage point higher than its year-earlier rate of increase. In December, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 7.0 percent, while core CPI inflation was 5.5 percent over the same period. The staff’s common inflation ex- pectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, had largely leveled off over the fall and was close to its 2014 average. Real PCE was unchanged in November, and available indicators—including the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate PCE—pointed to a de- cline in December, possibly reflecting the sharp rise in COVID-19 cases in the second half of that month as well as some holiday sales having been pulled forward to earlier months. Housing demand remained strong, and available indicators suggested that residential investment increased in the fourth quarter. However, shortages of construction materials, buildable lots, and other inputs continued to weigh on activity in this sector. Business fixed investment appeared to post only a small gain in the fourth quarter, as investment in transporta- tion equipment was held back by supply bottlenecks and limited supplies of construction materials restrained nonresidential structures investment. Manufacturing output moved down in December after advancing strongly in October and November. Motor Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ vehicle assemblies reversed some of their November in- crease; in addition, manufacturing production outside of motor vehicles ticked lower. Total real government purchases appeared to have fallen in the fourth quarter. Although available data suggested that real federal purchases rose, indicators of real state and local government purchases pointed to a decline in the fourth quarter despite state and local governments’ extremely strong budget positions and the widespread return to in-person schooling last fall. The U.S. international trade deficit widened at the end of last year. Imports of goods rose sharply in November and December, led by increases in consumer goods, while exports of goods were little changed over the two months, on net, after surging in October. Shipping con- gestion and other bottlenecks continued to restrain the level of trade in goods. Meanwhile, services exports jumped in November, reflecting a sizable increase in ex- ports of travel services after the reopening of U.S. bor- ders to vaccinated foreign travelers early in the month. Even so, services trade was very low relative to pre-pan- demic norms, largely because the level of international travel remained depressed. Incoming data suggested that foreign economic growth picked up in the fourth quarter of 2021 as economies in emerging Asia bounced back from lockdowns in the third quarter induced by the Delta variant of the COVID-19 virus. Purchasing managers indexes (PMIs) pointed to improved supplier delivery times, and foreign vehicle production rose notably, suggesting that supply bottlenecks continued to ease somewhat. However, the rapid spread of the Omicron variant led to renewed pub- lic health restrictions in several countries, particularly in China, and appeared to be weighing on activity at the start of the year. Inflation abroad continued to rise, mostly driven by further increases in retail energy prices, effects from supply bottlenecks, and, in some emerging market economies (EMEs), by rising food prices. That said, input and output price components of PMIs pro- vided some tentative signs that easing supply constraints have started to contribute to some letup in inflationary pressures in several foreign economies. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, easing concerns around the economic effects of the Omicron variant and FOMC communications that were viewed as less accommoda- tive than expected contributed to increases in Treasury yields. Long-term sovereign yields in AFEs also rose no- tably. Broad domestic equity indexes decreased mark- edly, and spreads of corporate bonds widened modestly. Short-term funding markets were stable, while participa- tion in the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility increased further. Market-based fi- nancing conditions remained accommodative, and bank lending standards eased for most loan categories. The expected path for the federal funds rate over the next few years—implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes—rose notably since the December FOMC meeting, apparently reflecting less-accommoda- tive-than-expected FOMC communications and an eas- ing of concerns around the economic effects of the Omicron variant. Those factors also contributed to no- table rises in 2-, 5-, and 10-year nominal Treasury yields. Inflation compensation implied by Treasury Inflation- Protected Securities rose slightly, on net. Broad equity indexes decreased markedly, on net, partic- ularly in the latter part of the intermeeting period, as shifts in expectations about the pace of monetary policy tightening, global inflationary pressures, and escalating tensions between Russia and Ukraine weighed on equity prices. The one-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—increased considerably, on net, to above the 90th percentile of its historical distribution. Spreads of investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds widened modestly. Spreads of municipal bonds were roughly unchanged. Short-term funding markets were stable over the inter- meeting period. The effective federal funds rate and the Secured Overnight Financing Rate generally held steady at 8 basis points and 5 basis points, respectively. Partic- ipation in ON RRP operations averaged $1.6 trillion, about $150 billion higher than during the previous inter- meeting period, and reached an all-time high of $1.9 tril- lion at year-end. Government money market funds con- tinued to receive investment inflows and accounted for the majority of ON RRP take-up. Over the intermeeting period, movements in foreign as- set prices responded to waning concerns about the Omi- cron variant’s potential economic effects and firming views that monetary accommodation in several ad- vanced economies will be removed at a faster pace than previously expected. Some market participants also pointed to rising geopolitical tensions related to Russia as contributing to the moves. On net, AFE sovereign yields increased notably, most major foreign equity in- dexes declined moderately, and the broad dollar index decreased modestly. EME sovereign spreads widened, and capital flows into EME-dedicated bond funds re- mained slightly negative, while flows into EME equity funds turned positive. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 25–26, 2022Page 13 In domestic credit markets, financing conditions for nonfinancial firms remained broadly accommodative. Gross issuance of corporate bonds and leveraged loans remained solid but slowed somewhat in December, re- flecting seasonal factors. Equity funding raised through initial public offerings continued at a strong pace in No- vember and December, while equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies remained muted relative to earlier in 2021. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans expanded over the fourth quarter following more than a year of de- clines. In the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Sur- vey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks re- ported easier standards and stronger demand for C&I loans over the fourth quarter. The credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations re- mained strong over the intermeeting period. The vol- umes of nonfinancial corporate bond and leveraged loan upgrades exceeded those of downgrades in November and December. Trailing default rates on nonfinancial bonds edged down further to historical lows, while mar- ket indicators of future expected default rates remained benign and historically low. In the municipal bond market, financing conditions re- mained accommodative, as municipal bond yields stayed near historical lows. Issuance of municipal debt was strong in November and December. The credit quality of municipal debt remained stable, and the volume of defaults stayed low. Financing conditions for small businesses eased a bit over the intermeeting period. In the January SLOOS, small banks reported easing C&I loan standards to small firms over the fourth quarter. Loan originations to small businesses rose in November to near pre-pandemic lev- els. Banks in the January SLOOS reported stronger loan demand by small firms over the fourth quarter, though loan demand remained weak overall. Commercial real estate (CRE) loan balances on banks’ books expanded at a solid pace in the fourth quarter, and, in the January SLOOS, banks reported an easing of standards on such loans amid stronger demand for most CRE loan categories. Issuance of non-agency commer- cial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) surged in the fourth quarter, while issuance of agency CMBS slowed. Delinquency rates on mortgages in CMBS pools contin- ued to fall but remained elevated for hotel and retail mortgages. In the residential mortgage market, financing conditions remained accommodative, particularly for borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. In the Jan- uary SLOOS, banks reported easing lending standards for most mortgage categories in the fourth quarter. Mortgage rates increased over the intermeeting period in line with rates on agency MBS and 10-year Treasury se- curities but remained low by historical standards. The fraction of mortgage borrowers missing payments con- tinued to decline through November. Financing conditions for consumer credit remained ac- commodative for most borrowers, especially those with higher credit scores. Lending standards for nonprime consumers in the credit card market continued to ease from the tight levels seen earlier in the pandemic. Banks reported in the January SLOOS that demand for credit card loans strengthened over the fourth quarter, while lending standards eased for auto loans amid a weakening in demand. With sales running low because of con- strained supply, auto loan growth continued to slow in October and November from the more rapid pace rec- orded in the first half of the year. The staff provided an update on its assessments of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, charac- terized the financial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as notable. The staff judged that asset valuation pressures remained elevated. In particular, the forward price-to-earnings ratio for the S&P 500 index stood at the upper end of its historical distribution; high-yield corporate bond spreads and the excess loan premium for leveraged loans remained at low levels; and house prices grew strongly, with price-to-rent ratios that were at ele- vated levels. The staff noted that the market capitaliza- tion of crypto-assets had grown significantly over the past decade and had experienced considerable volatility, including sizable declines since late last year. The staff changed its assessment of vulnerabilities associated with nonfinancial leverage from notable to moderate, noting that measures of business leverage had declined to pre- pandemic levels. Household delinquency rates remained relatively low, while household borrowing rose but was concentrated among prime borrowers. Vulnerabilities arising from financial leverage remained moderate. Risk-based capital ratios for banks remained above their pre-pandemic levels even after the resumption of share- holder payouts. In contrast, some available measures of hedge fund leverage continued to increase, and im- portant data gaps continued to limit a full assessment of vulnerabilities posed by many nonbank financial institu- tions. Vulnerabilities associated with funding risks were characterized as moderate. Prime and tax-exempt money funds continued to have structural vulnerabilities that may lead investors to withdraw funds quickly in a Page 14Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ stress situation and were a potential source of spillovers to other short-term funding markets. In response, the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed reforms in December 2021 to make these funds more resilient. Another vulnerability in funding markets was the signif- icant growth in stablecoin arrangements over the past few years, which may increase challenges related to run risk and pose additional risks from their potential role as a means of payment. Staff Economic Outlook The near-term projection for U.S. economic activity pre- pared by the staff for the January FOMC meeting was weaker than in December, reflecting the sharp rise in COVID-19 infections caused by the rapid spread of the Omicron variant and an assessment that supply con- straints would resolve more slowly than previously ex- pected. Although real GDP still appeared to have posted a sizable gain in the fourth quarter of 2021, out- put growth was expected to slow noticeably in the first quarter of 2022 before picking up again later in the year as COVID-19 cases declined and supply issues contin- ued to be resolved. With most of the boost to growth from the reopening of the economy and easing of supply constraints expected to occur in 2022, real GDP growth was projected to step down in 2023 and to be roughly in line with potential growth in 2023 and 2024. However, the level of real GDP was expected to remain well above potential throughout the projection period, and labor market conditions were expected to remain very tight. The staff’s near-term projection for PCE price inflation was revised up relative to December in response to the anticipated slower resolution of supply issues. In partic- ular, the staff continued to expect that monthly inflation rates would move lower as supply constraints eased, but the projected step-down was less pronounced than in the December forecast. Even so, an improvement in supply conditions and a decline in consumer energy prices were expected to slow PCE price inflation to 2.6 percent in 2022. With supply conditions expected to normalize further but with the labor market expected to remain very tight, PCE price inflation was projected to decline to 2 percent in 2023 before edging up to 2.1 per- cent in 2024. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks to the inflation projection were skewed to the upside. In particular, the possibility that the economic effects of the virus would turn out to be larger than assumed in the baseline projection was viewed as an important source of downside risk to activ- ity, while the possibility of more severe and more persis- tent supply issues was viewed as an additional downside risk to activity and as an upside risk to inflation. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but continued to be affected by the re- cent sharp rise in COVID-19 cases. Job gains had been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. Supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the econ- omy had continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. Overall financial conditions had remained ac- commodative, in part reflecting policy measures to sup- port the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. house- holds and businesses. Participants judged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccinations and an easing of sup- ply constraints were expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation. Risks to the economic outlook remained, including from new variants of the virus. With regard to the economic outlook, participants agreed that the Omicron wave of the pandemic would weigh on economic activity in the first quarter of 2022. Indeed, sectors of the economy that are particularly sen- sitive to pandemic-related disruptions, including travel, leisure, and restaurants, were experiencing sharp reduc- tions in activity as a result of the Omicron wave. Partic- ipants commented that, for many afflicted individuals and families, the virus continued to cause great hardship. Participants concurred that if the Omicron wave dissi- pated quickly, then economic activity would likely strengthen rapidly and economic growth for 2022 as a whole would be robust. Participants cited strong house- hold balance sheets, rising wages, and effective adapta- tion to the pandemic by the business sector as factors supporting the outlook for strong growth this year. However, a number of participants noted that there was a risk that additional variants could weigh on economic activity this year. Participants noted that supply chain bottlenecks and la- bor shortages had continued to limit businesses’ ability to meet strong demand, with these challenges exacer- bated by the emergence and spread of the Omicron var- iant. In particular, the Omicron wave had led to much _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 25–26, 2022Page 15 more widespread worker absences due to illness, virus exposure, or caregiving needs, which had curtailed activ- ity in many sectors including airlines, trucking, and ware- housing. Some participants reported that their business contacts were hopeful that the effects of the Omicron wave would be relatively short lived. Nevertheless, sev- eral participants reported that their contacts expected the ongoing labor shortages and other supply constraints to persist well after the acute effects of the Omicron wave had waned. Participants’ contacts also reported continued widespread input cost pressures, which, amid generally robust demand, they reported having largely been able to pass on to their customers. A few partici- pants commented that agricultural businesses were ex- periencing higher input costs, and those higher costs were putting strain on the finances of those firms even as they experienced generally strong demand for their products. In their discussion of the household sector, many partic- ipants noted that the onset of the Omicron wave had damped consumer demand, particularly for services, with much of the recent weakness concentrated in high- contact sectors such as travel, dining, and leisure and hospitality. Almost all of those participants anticipated that household demand would recover briskly if the Omicron wave subsided quickly, with spending sup- ported by strong household balance sheets that were bolstered by high rates of saving earlier in the pandemic and ongoing robust gains in labor income. Participants noted that the labor market had made re- markable progress in recovering from the recession as- sociated with the pandemic and, by most measures, was now very strong. Increases in employment had been solid in recent months; the unemployment rate had de- clined sharply, reaching 3.9 percent in December; job openings and quits were near record high levels; and nominal wages were rising at the fastest pace in decades. Several participants commented that the gains, on bal- ance, over recent months had been broad based, with notable improvements for lower-wage workers as well as African Americans and Hispanics. Against this back- drop of a generally strong and improving labor market, many participants observed that the effects of the Omi- cron variant likely would only temporarily suppress the rate of labor market gains. The labor force participation rate had edged up further over the past few months, and some participants indicated that they expected it to con- tinue to increase as the pandemic eased. A couple of participants noted that the participation rate remained lower than trend levels that account for changing de- mographics. Participants noted that their District contacts were re- porting that labor demand remained historically strong and that labor supply remained constrained, resulting in a broad shortage of workers across many parts of the economy. As a result, there was widespread evidence that the labor market was very tight, including near-rec- ord rates of quits and job vacancies as well as nominal wage growth that was the highest recorded in decades. Several participants reported that District business con- tacts were either planning to implement or had imple- mented larger wage increases than those of recent years to retain current employees or attract new workers. A few participants also reported contacts having been forced to reduce operating hours or close businesses temporarily because of labor shortages. Acknowledging that the maximum level of employment consistent with price stability evolves over time, partici- pants expressed a range of views regarding their assess- ments of current labor market conditions relative to the Committee’s goal of maximum employment. Many par- ticipants commented that they viewed labor market con- ditions as already at or very close to those consistent with maximum employment, citing indications of strong labor markets including the low levels of unemployment rates, elevated wage pressures, near-record levels of job openings and quits, and a broad shortage of workers across many parts of the economy. A couple of partici- pants commented that, in their view, the economy likely had not yet reached maximum employment, noting that, even for prime-age workers, labor force participation rates were still lower than those that prevailed before the pandemic or that a reallocation of labor across sectors could lead to higher levels of employment over time. Participants remarked that recent inflation readings had continued to significantly exceed the Committee’s longer-run goal and elevated inflation was persisting longer than they had anticipated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the re- opening of the economy. However, some participants commented that elevated inflation had broadened be- yond sectors most directly affected by those factors, bol- stered in part by strong consumer demand. In addition, various participants cited other developments that had the potential to place additional upward pressure on in- flation, including real wage growth in excess of produc- tivity growth and increases in prices for housing services. Participants acknowledged that elevated inflation was a burden on U.S. households, particularly those who were least able to pay higher prices for essential goods and services. Some participants reported that their business Page 16Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ contacts remained concerned about persistently high in- flation and that they were adjusting their business prac- tices to cope with higher input costs—for instance, by raising output prices or utilizing contracts that were con- tingent on their costs. Participants generally expected inflation to moderate over the course of the year as sup- ply and demand imbalances ease and monetary policy accommodation is removed. Some participants re- marked that longer-term measures of inflation expecta- tions appeared to remain well anchored, which would support a return of inflation over time to levels con- sistent with the Committee’s goals. In their discussion of risks to the outlook, participants agreed that uncertainty regarding the path of inflation was elevated and that risks to inflation were weighted to the upside. Participants cited several such risks, includ- ing the zero-tolerance COVID-19 policy in China that had the potential to further disrupt supply chains, the possibility of geopolitical turmoil that could cause in- creases in global energy prices or exacerbate global sup- ply shortages, a worsening of the pandemic, persistent real wage growth in excess of productivity growth that could trigger inflationary wage–price dynamics, or the possibility that longer-term inflation expectations could become unanchored. A few participants pointed to the possibility that structural factors that had contributed to low inflation in the previous decade, such as technolog- ical changes, demographics, and a low real interest rate environment, may reemerge when the effects of the pan- demic abate. Uncertainty about real activity was also seen as elevated. Various participants noted downside risks to the outlook, including a possible worsening of the pandemic, the potential for escalating geopolitical tensions, or a substantial tightening in financial condi- tions. Participants who commented on issues related to finan- cial stability cited a number of factors that could repre- sent potential vulnerabilities to the financial system. A few participants noted that asset valuations were ele- vated across a range of markets and raised the concern that a major realignment of asset prices could contribute to a future downturn. A couple of these participants judged that prolonged accommodative financial condi- tions could be contributing to financial imbalances. A couple of other participants cited reasons why elevated asset valuations might prove to be less of a threat to fi- nancial stability than in past reversals of asset prices. In particular, they noted the relatively healthy balance sheet positions of households and nonfinancial firms, the well- capitalized and liquid banking sector, and the fact that the rise in housing prices was not being fueled by a large increase in mortgage debt as suggesting that the financial system might prove resilient to shocks. Some partici- pants saw emerging risks to financial stability associated with the rapid growth in crypto-assets and decentralized finance platforms. A few participants pointed to risks associated with highly leveraged, nonbank financial in- stitutions or the potential vulnerability of prime money market funds to a sudden withdrawal of liquidity. In their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants agreed that it would be appropriate for the Committee to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent in support of the Committee’s ob- jectives of maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. They also antici- pated that it would soon be appropriate to raise the tar- get range. In discussing why beginning to remove policy accommodation could soon be warranted, participants noted that inflation continued to run well above 2 per- cent and generally judged the risks to the outlook for in- flation as tilted to the upside. Participants also assessed that the labor market was strong, having made substan- tial, broad-based progress over the past year. In light of elevated inflation pressures and the strong la- bor market, participants continued to judge that the Committee’s net asset purchases should be concluded soon. Most participants preferred to continue to reduce the Committee’s net asset purchases according to the schedule announced in December, bringing them to an end in early March. A couple of participants stated that they favored ending the Committee’s net asset purchases sooner to send an even stronger signal that the Commit- tee was committed to bringing down inflation. Participants discussed the implications of the economic outlook for the likely timing and pace for removing pol- icy accommodation. Compared with conditions in 2015 when the Committee last began a process of removing monetary policy accommodation, participants viewed that there was a much stronger outlook for growth in economic activity, substantially higher inflation, and a notably tighter labor market. Consequently, most par- ticipants suggested that a faster pace of increases in the target range for the federal funds rate than in the post- 2015 period would likely be warranted, should the econ- omy evolve generally in line with the Committee’s ex- pectation. Even so, participants emphasized that the ap- propriate path of policy would depend on economic and financial developments and their implications for the outlook and the risks around the outlook, and they will be updating their assessments of the appropriate setting for the policy stance at each meeting. Participants noted _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 25–26, 2022Page 17 that the removal of policy accommodation in current cir- cumstances depended on the timing and pace of both increases in the target range of the federal funds rate and the reduction in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. In this context, a number of participants com- mented that conditions would likely warrant beginning to reduce the size of the balance sheet sometime later this year. In their discussion of the outlook for monetary policy, many participants noted the influence on financial con- ditions of the Committee’s recent communications and viewed these communications as helpful in shifting pri- vate-sector expectations regarding the policy outlook into better alignment with the Committee’s assessment of appropriate policy. Participants continued to stress that maintaining flexibility to implement appropriate policy adjustments on the basis of risk-management considerations should be a guiding principle in conduct- ing policy in the current highly uncertain environment. Most participants noted that, if inflation does not move down as they expect, it would be appropriate for the Committee to remove policy accommodation at a faster pace than they currently anticipate. Some participants commented on the risk that financial conditions might tighten unduly in response to a rapid removal of policy accommodation. A few participants remarked that this risk could be mitigated through clear and effective com- munication of the Committee’s assessments of the eco- nomic outlook, the risks around the outlook, and the ap- propriate path for monetary policy. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. They noted that the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but were being affected by the recent sharp rise in COVID-19 cases. Job gains had been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. Members remarked that supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy had continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. Overall finan- cial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflect- ing policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Mem- bers also acknowledged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. Pro- gress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints were expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in infla- tion, but risks to the economic outlook remained, in- cluding from new variants of the virus. In order to support the Committee’s maximum-employ- ment and price-stability objectives, members agreed to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. With inflation well above 2 percent and a strong labor market, members expected that it would soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the fed- eral funds rate. Members agreed to continue to reduce the monthly pace of the Committee’s net asset pur- chases, bringing them to an end in early March. Specif- ically, beginning in February, the Committee would in- crease its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $20 billion per month and of agency MBS by at least $10 billion per month. Members noted that the Federal Reserve’s ongoing asset purchases and holdings of secu- rities would continue to foster smooth market function- ing and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and busi- nesses. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. They also concurred that, in as- sessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. Members agreed to remove the opening sentence from previous postmeeting statements regarding using the Federal Reserve’s full range of tools to support the U.S. economy. This language was adopted during the height of the financial market turmoil in March 2020, when the Committee began its asset purchase program, and mem- bers acknowledged that it was no longer warranted in light of the strong economy as well as the Committee’s announcement that net asset purchases would end in early March. Members agreed that the postmeeting statement should be updated to reflect the Committee’s expectation that it would soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate in light of ele- vated inflation pressures and the strong labor market. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute Page 18Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: The vote also encompassed approval of the state- ment below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective January 27, 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. • Complete the increase in System Open Market Account (SOMA) holdings of Treasury securities by $40 billion and of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $20 billion, as indicated in the monthly purchase plans released in mid-January. • • Increase the SOMA holdings of Treasury securities by $20 billion and of agency MBS by $10 billion, during the monthly purchase period beginning in mid-February. Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by additional amounts as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. • Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate opera- tion limit of $500 billion; the aggregate op- eration limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-coun- terparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” “Indicators of economic activity and employ- ment have continued to strengthen. The sec- tors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months but are being affected by the recent sharp rise in COVID-19 cases. Job gains have been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate has de- clined substantially. Supply and demand imbal- ances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. Overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part re- flecting policy measures to support the econ- omy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. The path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. Progress on vaccina- tions and an easing of supply constraints are ex- pected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation. Risks to the economic outlook re- main, including from new variants of the virus. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. With inflation well above 2 percent and a strong labor market, the Committee expects it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee decided to continue to reduce the monthly pace of its net asset purchases, bringing them to an end in early March. Beginning in February, the Com- mittee will increase its holdings of Treasury se- curities by at least $20 billion per month and of agency mortgage‑backed securities by at least $10 billion per month. The Federal Reserve’s ongoing purchases and holdings of securities will continue to foster smooth market function- ing and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to house- holds and businesses. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 25–26, 2022Page 19 policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, Vice Chair; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Esther L. George; Patrick Harker; Loretta J. Mester; and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. Patrick Harker voted as an alternate member at this meeting. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective Janu- ary 27, 2022. The Board also voted unanimously to ap- prove the establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, March 15–16, 2022. The meeting adjourned at 10:10 a.m. on Janu- ary 26, 2022. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on January 4, 2022, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 14–15, 2021. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 20Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee March 15–16, 2022 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, March 15, 2022, at 9:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, March 16, 2022, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Esther L. George Loretta J. Mester Christopher J. Waller Meredith Black, Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Naureen Hassan, and Neel Kashkari, Alternate Members of the Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively Kenneth C. Montgomery, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Brian M. Doyle, Carlos Garriga, Joseph W. Gruber, David E. Lebow, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Jon Faust and Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Advisers to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board Antulio N. Bomfim, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, and Nitish R. Sinha, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board David Bowman, David López-Salido, and Min Wei, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Stephanie E. Curcuru and Matteo Iacoviello,3 Associate Directors, Division of International Finance, Board; Burcu Duygan-Bump, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Jeffrey 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of plans for reducing the size of the balance sheet. 3 Attended through the staff review of the economic and fi- nancial situation. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ D. Walker,2 Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Zeynep Senyuz and Rebecca Zarutskie, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Paul Lengermann and Clara Vega, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Dan Li, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Alyssa G. Anderson,2 Valerie S. Hinojosa, and Lubomir Petrasek,2 Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Penelope A. Beattie,2 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board; Logan T. Lewis,3 Section Chief, Division of International Finance, Board David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Mary Tian2 and Randall A. Williams, Group Managers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Michele Cavallo and Ander Perez-Orive, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Cynthia L. Doniger and David Glancy,4 Senior Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board David Na,2 Senior Financial Institution and Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board Kelly J. Dubbert, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Kartik B. Athreya, Michael Dotsey, and Sylvain Leduc, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Philadelphia, and San Francisco, respectively Edward S. Knotek II, Anna Nordstrom,2 Giovanni Olivei, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, New York, Boston, and Minneapolis, respectively 4 Attended Tuesday’s session only. Kathryn B. Chen, Lisa Chung,2 Jonas Fisher, Mark J. Jensen, Matthew D. Raskin, Andrea Tambalotti, and Benedict Wensley,2 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, New York, Chicago, Atlanta, New York, New York, and New York, respectively Seth Searls,2 Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Karel Mertens, Senior Economic Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Justin Meyer,2 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a review of global financial market developments. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the subsequent imposition of an array of sanctions, the ruble depreciated roughly 40 percent against the dollar. Prices of dollar-denominated Russian bonds plunged 80 to 90 percent, and local trading of Russian equities was suspended after a precipitous de- cline in Russian stock price indexes. Global financial conditions tightened, reflecting declines in equity prices, increases in sovereign yields and credit spreads, and— for the United States—an appreciation of the dollar. Prices of commodities that Russia exports, particularly oil and natural gas, soared over the period. While oil prices partially retraced late in the period, options prices suggested considerable probability that oil prices could remain elevated or rise further in the months ahead. Alongside the rise in commodities prices, measures of near-term inflation compensation increased sharply across advanced economies. In Eastern European countries, currencies depreciated notably and equity prices declined, but most emerging market currencies outside of Eastern Europe depreciated only modestly or rose. Sovereign spreads for emerging market economies (EMEs) widened, but the moves outside of Eastern Eu- rope were relatively modest. The developments in Ukraine sparked some liquidity strains across markets. Overnight interest rates were steady throughout the period, but there were some signs of pressures in term funding markets. High levels of re- serves in the banking system and the backstop facilities Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ in place—the new repurchase agreement facility for for- eign and international monetary authorities (FIMA Repo Facility) and the standing repo facility (SRF), as well as the standing central bank liquidity swap lines and the dis- count window—likely supported market confidence re- garding the availability of liquidity and helped contain funding pressures. Amid a rise in market volatility, trad- ing liquidity declined across a number of sectors. In the Treasury market, market depth fell and the price impact of trades increased modestly in some sectors. Overall, however, volumes were typical, and markets continued to function in an orderly fashion. Notwithstanding uncertainties associated with geopolit- ical developments, many central banks continued to sig- nal intentions to move ahead with reducing policy ac- commodation to address elevated inflation. Market- implied policy rates one year forward rose notably across many advanced foreign economies (AFEs), extending increases seen over recent months. In the United States, incoming economic data and Fed- eral Reserve communications led investors to expect a more rapid removal of policy accommodation than they had previously expected. Market participants almost universally expected a 25 basis point increase in the tar- get range for the federal funds rate at the current meet- ing. Moreover, futures prices implied that the federal funds rate would increase around 170 basis points through year-end, about 70 basis points more than had been priced in at the time of the January meeting. Simi- larly, the median projection of the target range for the federal funds rate in the Open Market Desk’s most re- cent surveys of primary dealers and market participants showed an increase of 150 basis points this year. The median projected path for the target range beyond 2022 rose another 100 basis points by the first half of 2024 to a level modestly above the median projected longer-run level before returning closer to the longer-run level in 2025. Consistent with shifting expectations for the path of policy, shorter-dated Treasury yields rose notably over the intermeeting period and the spread between the 10-year Treasury yield and 2-year Treasury yield nar- rowed. Market participants expected an earlier and somewhat faster reduction in System Open Market Account (SOMA) holdings of securities than they did in January. In the Desk surveys, almost 90 percent of respondents projected balance sheet runoff to begin by July. Overall, survey respondents expected a significant reduction in the balance sheet over coming years, although there was a high degree of uncertainty around the magnitude of the total decline. The manager turned next to a discussion of money mar- kets and policy implementation. Market participants ex- pected the interest on reserve balances rate and over- night reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) offering rate to be increased by 25 basis points at the current meeting, in line with their expected increase in the target range, and anticipated that the changes would fully pass through to market overnight interest rates. There was uncertainty around how ON RRP usage might evolve in the near term as money market rates increased. If banks lifted their deposit rates by less than the increase in re- turns available on alternative investments, depositors could shift funds into these alternatives, leading to downward pressure on rates and increased ON RRP take-up. If instead deposit rates moved up in line with net yields on alternative investments, ON RRP takeup could remain relatively steady. Over the longer term, however, ON RRP balances were expected to decline as the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet runoff proceeded and gradually lifted money market rates relative to the ON RRP rate. Turning to Desk operations, the manager noted that the Desk would be maintaining the size of the SOMA port- folio through reinvestments until the Committee di- rected otherwise. For Treasury securities, the Desk would follow the usual practice of rolling over all princi- pal payments at auctions. In the absence of regular sec- ondary-market purchases of Treasury securities, the Desk planned to maintain operational readiness by con- ducting small-value purchases and sales of Treasury se- curities. For agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), the Desk planned to continue to reinvest principal pay- ments on a monthly basis through secondary-market purchases. The manager discussed a plan to simplify ad- ministrative aspects of the SOMA holdings of agency MBS in coming months through a process of CUSIP (Committee on Uniform Securities Identification Proce- dures) aggregation. The Desk undertook similar pro- grams of CUSIP aggregation following the conclusion of previous large-scale asset purchase programs; these past CUSIP aggregation programs were successful at reduc- ing the cost and complexity of maintaining agency MBS holdings. Finally, the manager provided an update on the SRF. The Desk had onboarded four depository institutions as counterparties and noted that a number of additional banks were currently under review. The Desk planned to adjust the counterparty eligibility requirements in Minutes of the Meeting of March 15–16, 2022Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ early April to make the SRF accessible to a broader range of banks, in line with the Committee’s intention to ex- pand eligibility over time and with efforts to ensure that Desk counterparty policies promote a fair and competi- tive marketplace. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. No intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the System’s account during the intermeeting period. Plans for Reducing the Size of the Balance Sheet Participants continued their discussion of topics related to plans for reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in a manner consistent with the approach described in the Principles for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that the Committee re- leased following its January meeting. The participants’ discussion was preceded by a staff presentation that reviewed the Committee’s 2017–19 ex- perience with balance sheet reduction and presented a range of possible options for reducing the Federal Re- serve’s securities holdings over time in a predictable manner. All of the options featured a more rapid pace of balance sheet runoff than in the 2017–19 episode. The options differed primarily with respect to the size of the monthly caps for securities redemptions in the SOMA portfolio. The presentation addressed the po- tential implications of each option for the path of the balance sheet during and after runoff. The staff presen- tation also featured alternative approaches the Commit- tee could consider with respect to SOMA holdings of Treasury bills as well as alternative ways the Committee could eventually slow and then stop balance sheet runoff as the size of the SOMA portfolio approached levels consistent with the Committee’s ample-reserves frame- work for policy implementation. In their discussion, all participants agreed that elevated inflation and tight labor market conditions warranted commencement of balance sheet runoff at a coming meeting, with a faster pace of decline in securities hold- ings than over the 2017–19 period. Participants reaf- firmed that the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings should be reduced over time in a predictable manner pri- marily by adjusting the amounts reinvested of principal payments received from securities held in the SOMA. Principal payments received from securities held in the SOMA would be reinvested to the extent they exceeded monthly caps. Several participants remarked that they would be comfortable with relatively high monthly caps or no caps. Some other participants noted that monthly caps for Treasury securities should take into considera- tion potential risks to market functioning. Participants generally agreed that monthly caps of about $60 billion for Treasury securities and about $35 billion for agency MBS would likely be appropriate. Participants also gen- erally agreed that the caps could be phased in over a pe- riod of three months or modestly longer if market con- ditions warrant. Participants discussed the approach toward implement- ing caps for Treasury securities and the role that the Fed- eral Reserve’s holdings of Treasury bills might play in the Committee’s plan to reduce the size of the balance sheet. Most participants judged that it would be appropriate to redeem coupon securities up to the cap amount each month and to redeem Treasury bills in months when Treasury coupon principal payments were below the cap. Under this approach, redemption of Treasury bills would typically bring the total amount of Treasury re- demptions up to the monthly cap. Several participants remarked that reducing the Federal Reserve’s Treasury bill holdings over time would be appropriate because Treasury bills are highly valued as safe and liquid assets by the private sector, and the Treasury could increase bill issuance to the public as SOMA bill holdings decline. In addition, participants generally noted that maintaining large holdings of Treasury bills is not necessary under the Federal Reserve’s ample-reserves operating frame- work; in the previous scarce-reserves regime, Treasury bill holdings were useful as a tool that could be used to drain reserves from the banking system when necessary to control short-term interest rates. A couple of partic- ipants commented that holding some Treasury bills could be appropriate if the Federal Reserve wished to keep its Treasury portfolio neutral with respect to the universe of outstanding Treasury securities. With respect to the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS re- demptions, participants generally noted that MBS prin- cipal prepayments would likely run under the proposed monthly cap in a range of plausible interest rate scenar- ios but that the cap could guard against outsized reduc- tions in the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS holdings in scenarios with especially high prepayments. Some par- ticipants noted that under the proposed approach to running off Treasury and agency securities primarily through adjustments to reinvestments, agency MBS holdings would still make up a sizable share of the Fed- eral Reserve’s asset holdings for many years. Partici- pants generally agreed that after balance sheet runoff was well under way, it will be appropriate to consider sales of agency MBS to enable suitable progress toward a longer-run SOMA portfolio composed primarily of Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Treasury securities. A Committee decision to implement a program of agency MBS sales would be announced well in advance. Several participants noted the significant uncertainty around the future level of reserves that would be con- sistent with the Committee’s ample-reserves operating framework. Against this backdrop, participants gener- ally agreed that it would be appropriate to first slow and then stop the decline in the size of the balance sheet when reserve balances were above the level the Commit- tee judged to be consistent with ample reserves, thereby allowing reserves to decline more gradually as nonre- serve liabilities increased over time. Participants agreed that lessons learned from the previous balance sheet re- duction episode should inform the Committee’s current approach to reaching ample reserve levels and that close monitoring of money market conditions and indicators of near-ample reserves should help inform adjustments to the pace of runoff. A couple of participants noted that the establishment of the SRF, which did not exist in the previous runoff episode, could address unexpected money market pressures that might emerge if the Com- mittee adopted an approach to balance sheet reduction in which reserves declined relatively rapidly, but several others noted that the facility was not intended as a sub- stitute for ample reserves. Participants generally agreed that it was important for the Committee to be prepared to adjust any of the details of its approach to reducing the size of the balance sheet in light of economic and financial developments. No decision regarding the Committee’s plan to reduce the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet was made at this meeting, but participants agreed they had made substan- tial progress on the plan and that the Committee was well placed to begin the process of reducing the size of the balance sheet as early as after the conclusion of its upcoming meeting in May. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the March 15– 16 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic prod- uct (GDP) was increasing in the first quarter at a pace that was slower than the rapid gain posted in the fourth quarter of 2021. Labor market conditions improved fur- ther in January and February, and indicators of labor compensation continued to show robust increases. Consumer price inflation through January—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)—re- mained elevated. Total nonfarm payroll employment grew strongly in Jan- uary and February. The unemployment rate edged down, on net, from 3.9 percent in December to 3.8 per- cent in February. The unemployment rate for African Americans and for Hispanics declined over this period; however, both rates remained noticeably higher than the national average. The labor force participation rate in- creased in February, as did the employment-to-popula- tion ratio. The private-sector job openings rate in Janu- ary, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turn- over Survey, was little changed, on net, from its Novem- ber level and remained well above its pre-pandemic level; the quits rate also remained elevated. Average hourly earnings rose 5.1 percent over the 12 months ending in February, about the same as its year-earlier pace, with widespread increases across industries. Consumer prices continued to rise rapidly. Total PCE price inflation was 6.1 percent over the 12 months end- ing in January, and core PCE price inflation, which ex- cludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 5.2 percent over the same pe- riod. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE in- flation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dal- las was 3.5 percent in January, 1.8 percentage points higher than its year-earlier rate of increase. In February, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 7.9 percent, while core CPI inflation was 6.4 percent over the same period. The staff’s common inflation ex- pectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, had largely leveled off over the fall and was close to its 2014 average. Real PCE appeared to be rising at a faster pace in the first quarter of 2022 than in the fourth quarter of 2021 as social distancing unwound further. Housing demand remained strong, though activity in the residential hous- ing sector continued to be restrained by shortages of construction materials, buildable lots, and other inputs. Available indicators suggested that growth in business fixed investment was picking up in the first quarter as growth in nonresidential structures investment turned positive. Available data suggested that motor vehicle production declined sharply in February as ongoing shortages of semiconductors and other supply chain problems con- tinued to restrain output. Outside of the motor vehicle sector, manufacturing production appeared to have moved up over January and February; however, this in- crease did not appear to reflect a substantial reduction in supply bottlenecks, as many indicators of the state of Minutes of the Meeting of March 15–16, 2022Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ bottlenecks showed little sign of improvement over this period. In particular, materials inputs such as electronic components and aluminum remained in short supply, while broad measures of industrial input prices remained elevated. Separately, transportation and distribution ac- tivity continued to be held back by port congestion and a shortage of truck drivers. Available indicators suggested that real government pur- chases were little changed in the first quarter after de- clining in the fourth quarter of 2021. Although real state and local purchases appeared to be rising, federal de- fense purchases appeared to be contracting further in the first quarter. The U.S. international trade deficit widened at the end of last year to a record high and surpassed that high at the beginning of this year. Imports of goods grew rap- idly again in January, led by increases in consumer goods, while exports of goods fell back slightly from elevated fourth-quarter levels. Shipping congestion and other bottlenecks continued to restrain the level of trade in goods. Services exports and imports fell back in January relative to December, reflecting a reduction in travel to and from the United States. Because international travel remained depressed, services trade was still very low rel- ative to pre-pandemic norms. Incoming data suggested that the rapid spread of the Omicron variant had tempered the foreign recovery around the turn of the year. Purchasing managers in- dexes were consistent with the Omicron wave having a notable effect on services activity but a rather muted ef- fect on manufacturing activity and supplier delivery times. Moreover, with COVID-19 cases having fallen in many regions, authorities had already eased restrictions and social mobility had recovered, except in China, where lockdowns were recently reimposed. The Russian invasion of Ukraine, however, constituted another neg- ative shock to the global economy by pushing up com- modity prices further, hurting global risk sentiment, and exacerbating supply bottlenecks. Inflation abroad con- tinued to rise, driven by recovering global demand, rising retail energy and food prices, and ongoing strains on global supply chains; the effects of the Russian invasion contributed to some of these inflationary pressures. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Financial markets were highly volatile over the inter- meeting period, with strained liquidity in some markets. The Russian invasion of Ukraine led to periods of par- ticularly elevated volatility and deteriorating investor risk sentiment. Nominal Treasury yields and the expected path of policy rose during the intermeeting period, driven by economic data releases and FOMC communi- cations that were viewed as implying a more rapid re- moval of monetary policy accommodation than previ- ously expected. Domestic equity indexes declined mod- estly, while those in Europe fell noticeably. Financing conditions remained accommodative, although borrow- ing costs increased further. Investors interpreted incoming economic data and Fed- eral Reserve communications as implying a more rapid removal of monetary policy accommodation than they had previously expected. On net, the expected path of the federal funds rate implied by financial market quotes—unadjusted for term premiums—rose signifi- cantly, along with the yields on nominal Treasury secu- rities, since the previous FOMC meeting. Near-term in- flation compensation implied by Treasury Inflation- Protected Securities rose sharply, reflecting the higher- than-anticipated CPI releases and surging energy prices following the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Spreads of investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds widened noticeably since the previous FOMC meeting and ended the period close to the medians of their historical distributions. Spreads of municipal bonds also widened significantly across credit categories. Broad equity indexes declined modestly, on net, amid significant fluctuations. Equity prices increased early in the period because of stronger-than-anticipated corpo- rate earnings and economic data releases, but they re- traced these gains as investor risk sentiment deteriorated following the Ukraine invasion. The one-month option- implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—surged briefly immediately following the invasion but ended the intermeeting period slightly lower on net. Foreign asset prices were highly volatile over the inter- meeting period in response to geopolitical develop- ments, central bank communications, and rising infla- tion concerns. News related to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, in particular, contributed to decreases in major foreign equity indexes, especially in Europe, and a mod- erate increase in the broad dollar index. Despite down- ward pressure from the geopolitical events, AFE sover- eign yields increased notably, on net, on higher-than-ex- pected inflation readings and central bank communica- tions that were perceived as less accommodative than expected. EME sovereign spreads widened, and EME- dedicated funds experienced moderate portfolio out- flows, which increased after the Russian invasion. Even so, financial conditions among EMEs—including fund flows and the relative strength of local currencies outside of Europe—were resilient compared with past episodes Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ of global turbulence, reflecting in part higher commodity prices and monetary policy tightening by EME central banks. Liquidity conditions became strained in some financial markets during the intermeeting period. Market depth—a gauge of the ability to transact in large volumes at quotes posted by market makers—deteriorated in U.S. Treasury, U.S. equity, and crude oil markets. Trading volumes generally remained within normal ranges in most markets and increased above normal levels in Treasury markets later in the period. Bid–ask spreads did not increase notably in most markets. However, in- vestors reported that strained liquidity at times amplified the volatility of price moves and may have contributed to the particularly large swings in Treasury yields and eq- uity prices late in the intermeeting period. Short-term funding markets were mostly stable over the intermeeting period, although spreads in some segments widened. The effective federal funds rate and the Se- cured Overnight Financing Rate generally held steady at 8 basis points and 5 basis points, respectively. Overnight rates on commercial paper (CP) across most sectors also held steady, although rates and spreads on longer-tenor CP and negotiable certificates of deposit increased amid the escalation of the Ukraine invasion. Spreads between three-month forward rate agreements and overnight in- dex swaps widened as borrowers increased precaution- ary issuance of longer-tenor debt while money market investors preferred investments. ON RRP take-up was little changed, averaging about $1.6 trillion. shorter-duration In domestic credit markets, credit remained broadly available for most types of borrowers during the inter- meeting period. Nonfinancial gross corporate bond is- suance slowed noticeably in January and February, re- flecting lower demand for credit due to rising borrowing costs and elevated issuance over the past two years. However, issuance rebounded to healthy levels in March for investment-grade firms, with a few high-yield firms also raising funds. Leveraged loan issuance was strong in January and February. Small business loan origina- tions in December roughly matched pre-pandemic lev- els. The share of small firms that actively sought financ- ing in the past few months and reported that it was more difficult to acquire credit compared with three months earlier remained very low. For households, both nonmortgage and mortgage credit remained accommodative. Credit card balances in- creased significantly in the fourth quarter, and auto credit outstanding grew at a moderate pace in Decem- ber. The number of mortgage rate locks for home pur- chases through February was elevated relative to pre- pandemic levels. Mortgage credit for households with low credit scores continued to ease through February but remained tighter than before the pandemic. The credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations and municipalities remained strong over the intermeeting pe- riod. The volumes of credit rating upgrades for corpo- rate and municipal bonds outpaced those of downgrades moderately in January and February. Default rates on corporate bonds, municipal bonds, and leveraged loans remained very low; most market indicators of future ex- pected default rates for corporate bonds and leveraged loans also remained low. Credit quality in the commercial real estate sector con- tinued to show some signs of stress. Delinquency rates for commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) col- lateralized by hotel and retail properties continued to de- cline in January but remained well above pre-pandemic levels, while those for CMBS in the office sector in- creased somewhat in January but remained fairly low by historical standards. For households, credit quality remained fairly healthy. Delinquency rates for mortgages, which include loans in forbearance and other loans behind on payments, con- tinued to trend down through December, while those for prime auto loan and prime credit card borrowers re- mained flat in December. For nonprime borrowers, de- linquency rates rose in December, although they re- mained subdued by historical standards. Information on borrowing costs through February and early March suggested that the events surrounding Rus- sia’s invasion of Ukraine did not have a significant effect on financing conditions during the intermeeting period. Borrowing costs continued to increase in many sectors but remained low relative to their historical distributions. Spreads in the corporate bond, municipal bond, and CMBS markets generally rose to somewhat above their pre-pandemic levels, reflecting heightened geopolitical risks, uncertainty about the outlook for monetary policy, and elevated financial market volatility. Residential mortgage rates increased, mostly as a result of widening MBS spreads, which market participants attributed mainly to the tapering of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS purchases and uncertainty surrounding the market supply of agency MBS that would accompany balance sheet runoff by the Federal Reserve. Interest rates on Minutes of the Meeting of March 15–16, 2022Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ new credit cards rose to roughly their pre-pandemic lev- els, while rates on auto loans also rose slightly but re- mained significantly below pre-pandemic levels. Staff Economic Outlook The near-term projection for U.S. economic activity pre- pared by the staff for the March FOMC meeting was weaker than in January, reflecting the anticipated eco- nomic effects of the conflict in Ukraine and financial conditions that were expected to be less supportive than previously assumed. For 2022 as a whole, real GDP growth was projected to step down markedly from its rapid 2021 pace before picking up slightly in 2023 as the continued resolution of supply constraints provided a small boost to growth. Real GDP growth was expected to slow further in 2024 to a pace that was in line with potential growth. However, the level of real GDP was expected to remain well above potential over the projec- tion period, and labor market conditions were expected to remain very tight. The staff’s near-term projection for PCE price inflation was revised up considerably relative to January. The up- ward revision reflected the staff’s reaction to the persis- tently high and broad-based levels of domestic inflation, import price inflation, and wage growth that had been observed, as well as the staff’s expectation that the up- ward pressure on inflation from supply and demand im- balances would last longer than previously assumed. In addition, total PCE price inflation was further revised up to reflect higher expected paths for consumer energy and food prices. All told, total PCE price inflation was projected to be 4 percent in 2022. PCE price inflation was then expected to slow to 2.3 percent in 2023 and to 2.1 percent in 2024 as food, energy, and import price in- flation moved lower and as supply and demand imbal- ances were resolved. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks to the inflation projection were skewed to the upside. The COVID-19 pandemic remained a source of downside risk to activity, while the possibility of more severe and more persistent supply issues was viewed as posing an additional downside risk to activity and an upside risk to inflation. The Russian invasion of Ukraine was perceived as adding to the uncertainty around the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as the conflict carried the risk of further exacerbating supply chain disruptions and of putting additional up- ward pressure on inflation by boosting the prices for en- ergy, food, and other key commodities. Finally, the pos- sibility that continued high inflation would cause longer- term inflation expectations to become unanchored was seen as another upside risk to the inflation projection. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2022 through 2024 and over the longer run based on their individual assessments of ap- propriate monetary policy, including the path of the fed- eral funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, un- der appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Eco- nomic Projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. Job gains had been strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. Inflation remained ele- vated, reflecting continued supply and demand imbal- ances, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. With appropriate firming in the stance of monetary pol- icy, participants expected inflation to return to the Com- mittee’s 2 percent objective over time and the labor mar- ket to remain strong. Participants recognized that the invasion of Ukraine by Russia was causing tremendous human and economic hardship for the Ukrainian people. They judged that the implications of the war for the U.S. economy were highly uncertain, but in the near term, the invasion and related events were likely to create signifi- cant additional upward pressure on inflation and could weigh on economic activity. With regard to the economic outlook, participants noted that real GDP growth had slowed from its rapid pace in the fourth quarter of 2021, largely reflecting weaker in- ventory investment, but consumption and business in- vestment continued to rise solidly. The Omicron variant left only a mild and brief imprint on economic data, as households and firms appeared resilient to this wave of the virus. Relative to their December forecasts, partici- pants had revised down their projections for real GDP growth this year, reflecting factors such as a slowdown in inventory investment from its strong pace late last year, reduced fiscal and monetary policy accommoda- tion, and the Russian invasion of Ukraine, which had led to higher prices of energy and other commodities, in- creased uncertainty, and weighed on broader financial Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ conditions and consumer sentiment. Even so, partici- pants judged that economic fundamentals remained solid and that they expected above-trend growth to con- tinue, sustaining a strong labor market. Participants commented that demand for labor contin- ued to substantially exceed available supply across many parts of the economy and that their business contacts continued to report difficulties in hiring and retaining workers. Participants observed that various indicators pointed to a very tight labor market. Employment growth remained strong through the Omicron wave. A couple of participants highlighted that the annual bench- mark revision to the establishment survey employment data revealed stronger employment growth in the second half of 2021 than was initially reported. The unemploy- ment rate had fallen to a post-pandemic low, and quits and job openings were at all-time highs. Although pay- roll employment remained below its pre-pandemic level, the shortfall was concentrated in a few sectors and re- flected a shortage of workers rather than insufficient de- mand for labor. Consistent with a tight labor market, nominal wages were rising at the fastest pace in many years. While wage gains thus far had been the strongest among the lowest quartile of earners and among produc- tion and supervisory workers, wage pressures had begun to spread across the income and skill distributions. Many participants commented that they expected the la- bor market to remain strong and wage pressures to re- main elevated. A few participants noted that there were signs that the pandemic-related factors that had held back labor supply might be abating and pointed to the notable increase in the labor force participation rate among prime-age men in February. Participants remarked that recent inflation readings con- tinued to significantly exceed the Committee’s longer- run goal and noted that developments associated with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, including the related surge in energy prices, will add to near-term inflation pres- sures. Some participants noted that elevated inflation had continued to broaden from goods into services, es- pecially rents, and into sectors that had not yet experi- enced large price increases, such as education, apparel, and health care. A few participants also noted that the number of spending categories experiencing inflation rates above 4 percent had continued to rise, or that the trimmed mean inflation measure from the Federal Re- serve Bank of Dallas had risen to its highest level since the early 1980s. Many participants indicated that their business contacts continued to report substantial in- creases in wages and input prices that were being passed through into higher prices to their customers without any significant decrease in demand. Participants com- mented on a few factors that might lead the high infla- tion readings to persist, including strong aggregate de- mand, significant increases in energy and commodity prices, and supply chain disruptions that were likely to require a lengthy period to resolve. In addition, some participants noted that recent higher inflation could af- fect future inflation dynamics. For example, a few par- ticipants commented that persistently high inflation readings might lead businesses, when setting prices, to be more attentive to aggregate inflation or more willing to raise prices. In addition, a couple of other participants noted that some household survey data suggested that near-term consumer inflation expectations have become more sensitive to actual inflation readings since the be- ginning of the pandemic. A few participants commented that both survey- and market-based measures of short- term inflation expectations were at historically high lev- els. Several other participants noted that longer-term measures of inflation expectations from households, professional forecasters, and market participants still ap- peared to remain well anchored, which—together with appropriate monetary policy and an eventual easing of supply constraints—would support a return of inflation over time to levels consistent with the Committee’s longer-run goal. Participants agreed that developments surrounding the Russian invasion of Ukraine, including the resulting sanctions, were adding to inflation pressures and posing upside risks to the inflation outlook. Participants noted that Russia and Ukraine were major suppliers of various commodities used in the production of energy, food, and some industrial inputs. A continued cutoff of that supply from the world market would further push up prices for those commodities and, over time, lead to price increases in downstream industries. The invasion had also exacerbated the disruptions of supply chains. Participants commented that, by leading to higher en- ergy and food prices, weighing on consumer sentiment, and contributing to tighter financial conditions, the in- vasion also negatively affected the growth outlook. A few participants highlighted additional downside risks to growth associated with the war, such as the risk that a more protracted conflict than the public currently ex- pects could lead to much tighter global financial condi- tions or other disruptions. A couple of participants commented that the increased uncertainty might lead businesses and consumers to reduce spending, though their business contacts currently were not seeing signs of such shifts or expecting a significant pullback in demand. Minutes of the Meeting of March 15–16, 2022Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Several participants judged that the upside risk to infla- tion associated with the war appeared more significant than the downside risk to growth, as inflation was al- ready high, the United States had a relatively low level of financial and trade exposure to Russia, and the U.S. economy was well positioned to absorb additional ad- verse demand shocks. In their discussion of risks to the outlook, participants agreed that uncertainty regarding the path of inflation was elevated and that risks to inflation were weighted to the upside. Participants cited several such risks, includ- ing ongoing supply bottlenecks and rising energy and commodity prices, both of which were exacerbated by the Russian invasion; recent COVID-related lockdowns in China that had the potential to further disrupt supply chains; and the possibility that longer-run inflation ex- pectations might become unanchored. Uncertainty about real activity was also seen as elevated. Various participants noted downside risks to the outlook, includ- ing risks associated with the Russian invasion, a broad tightening in global financial conditions, and a pro- longed rise in energy prices. In their consideration of the appropriate stance of mon- etary policy, all participants concurred that the U.S. economy was very strong, with an extremely tight labor market, and that inflation was high and well above the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. Against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to begin a process of removing policy accommodation by raising the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. They further judged that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be warranted to achieve the Committee’s objectives. Par- ticipants also agreed that reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would play an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy and that they ex- pected it would be appropriate to begin this process at a coming meeting, possibly as soon as in May. Partici- pants judged that the firming of monetary policy, along- side an eventual waning of supply–demand imbalances, would help to keep longer-term inflation expectations anchored and bring inflation down over time to levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal while sustaining a strong labor market. Many participants noted that—with inflation well above the Committee’s objective, inflationary risks to the up- side, and the federal funds rate well below participants’ estimates of its longer-run level—they would have pre- ferred a 50 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. A number of these participants indicated, however, that, in light of greater near-term uncertainty associated with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, they judged that a 25 basis point increase would be appropriate at this meeting. Many participants noted that one or more 50 basis point increases in the target range could be appropriate at future meetings, particularly if inflation pressures remained elevated or intensified. A number of participants noted that the Committee’s previous communications had already con- tributed to a tightening of financial conditions, as evi- dent in the notable increase in longer-term interest rates over recent months. All participants indicated their strong commitment and determination to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. In that context, participants judged that the Committee’s approach of commencing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate, and indicating that ongoing increases were likely, was fully warranted. Participants judged that it would be appropriate to move the stance of monetary policy toward a neutral posture expeditiously. They also noted that, depending on eco- nomic and financial developments, a move to a tighter policy stance could be warranted. A few participants judged that, at the current juncture, a significant risk fac- ing the Committee was that elevated inflation and infla- tion expectations could become entrenched if the public began to question the Committee’s resolve to adjust the stance of policy as appropriate to achieve the Commit- tee’s 2 percent longer-run objective for inflation. These participants suggested that expediting the removal of policy accommodation would reduce this risk while also leaving the Committee well positioned to adjust the stance of policy if geopolitical and other developments led to a more rapid dissipation of demand pressures than expected. Participants agreed that the economic outlook was highly uncertain and that policy decisions must take ac- count of the state of financial markets and the economy. As always, the Committee would need to be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy in response to the evolving economic outlook and the risks to the outlook. In this regard, participants noted that developments as- sociated with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine posed height- ened risks for both the United States and the global economy. Against this backdrop, all participants judged that risk management would be important in deciding upon the appropriate stance of monetary policy, and that policy also would need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. In particular, all participants underscored the need to remain attentive Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ to the risks of further upward pressure on inflation and longer-run inflation expectations. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. Job gains had been strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. Members also agreed that inflation remained elevated, reflecting continued supply and demand imbalances, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. Members agreed that geopolitical developments war- ranted several changes to the postmeeting statement. They concurred that the invasion of Ukraine by Russia was causing tremendous human and economic hardship, and they agreed to update the statement to recognize this tragic situation. Members agreed that the implications of the war for the U.S. economy were highly uncertain, but they judged that, in the near term, the invasion and related events were likely to create additional upward pressure on inflation and weigh on economic activity. for achieving In their assessment of the monetary policy stance neces- sary the Committee’s maximum- employment and price-stability goals, members agreed that with appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, they expected inflation to return to the Commit- tee’s 2 percent objective and the labor market to remain strong. In support of these goals, the Committee de- cided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent and anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate. One member preferred to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 0.5 percentage point to ½ to ¾ percent at this meeting in light of elevated inflation pressures. With re- gard to reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal- ance sheet, all members agreed that they had made sub- stantial progress on arriving at a plan specifying the steps the Committee would take. They expected that, depend- ing on economic and financial conditions, beginning the process of reducing the size of the balance sheet would be appropriate at a coming meeting, possibly as early as at the Committee’s May meeting. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. They also concurred that, in as- sessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market condi- tions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective March 17, 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of ¼ to ½ percent. • Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate opera- tion limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per- counterparty limit can be temporarily in- creased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS) in agency MBS. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Indicators of economic activity and employ- ment have continued to strengthen. Job gains have been strong in recent months, and the un- employment rate has declined substantially. In- flation remains elevated, reflecting supply and Minutes of the Meeting of March 15–16, 2022Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pres- sures. The invasion of Ukraine by Russia is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. The implications for the U.S. economy are highly uncertain, but in the near term the inva- sion and related events are likely to create addi- tional upward pressure on inflation and weigh on economic activity. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, the Committee expects inflation to return to its 2 percent ob- jective and the labor market to remain strong. In support of these goals, the Committee de- cided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. In addition, the Committee ex- pects to begin reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mort- gage-backed securities at a coming meeting. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” George, Patrick Harker, Loretta J. Mester, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: James Bullard. Patrick Harker voted as an alternate member at this meeting. President Bullard preferred at this meeting to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 0.5 percentage point to ½ to ¾ percent in light of elevated inflation pressures. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 0.40 percent, effective March 17, 2022. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unani- mously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 0.50 percent, effective March 17, 2022.5 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, May 3–4, 2022.6 The meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. on March 16, 2022. Notation Votes By notation vote completed on February 15, 2022, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 25–26, 2022. By notation vote completed on February 17, 2022, the Committee unanimously approved the Investment Trading Policy for FOMC Officials and related revisions to the Program for Security of FOMC information. In conjunction with the notation vote, all non-voting par- ticipants also expressed support for the Policy and re- lated revisions to the Program. Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Esther L. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 5 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish the rate submitted by the boards of directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Rich- mond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco. This vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 0.50 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of March 17, 2022, and the date such Reserve Banks inform the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Dallas were informed of the Secretary of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 0.50 percent, effective March 17, 2022.) The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates. 6 An error in this date was corrected on April 6, 2022, shortly after publication. Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee May 3–4, 2022 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, May 3, 2022, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, May 4, 2022, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Esther L. George Loretta J. Mester Christopher J. Waller Meredith Black, Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Naureen Hassan, and Neel Kashkari, Alternate Members of the Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively Kenneth C. Montgomery, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Carlos Garriga, Joseph W. Gruber, Beverly Hirtle, David E. Lebow, Ellis W. Tallman, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Jon Faust and Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Advisers to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board Antulio N. Bomfim, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, and Nitish R. Sinha, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board William F. Bassett, Senior Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board; John J. Stevens, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Min Wei, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Paul R. Wood, Senior Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board Edward Nelson and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Andrew Figura, Glenn Follette, and Elizabeth K. Kiser, Associate Directors, Division of Research and 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Statistics, Board; Andrea Raffo, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board; Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Norman J. Morin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Zeynep Senyuz, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Etienne Gagnon and Andrew Meldrum, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board; Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Logan T. Lewis,4 Section Chief, Division of International Finance, Board Randall A. Williams, Group Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Isabel Cairó, Michele Cavallo, and Manjola Tase, Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Michael Dotsey, Michelle M. Neal, and Anna Paulson, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Philadelphia, New York, and Chicago, respectively Marc Giannoni, Giovanni Olivei, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Boston, and Minneapolis, respectively James P. Bergin, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Matthew D. Raskin,2 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, San Francisco, and New York, respectively Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a discussion of monetary policy expectations in the United States. Federal Re- serve communications since the March FOMC meeting were perceived as signaling a more rapid removal of pol- icy accommodation than had been expected, resulting in significant shifts in expectations regarding the path of the federal funds rate. For the current meeting, federal funds futures implied around 50 basis points of policy rate tightening, and Open Market Desk survey respond- ents assigned an average probability of 80 percent to that outcome. The median Desk survey respondents also projected 50-basis-point increases in the target range at the two following meetings and another 125 basis points of increases by the middle of next year, bringing the pro- jected midpoint of the target range to a peak of 3.13 per- cent—substantially higher than in previous surveys. Market participants continued to note significant uncer- tainty regarding the economic outlook and the degree of policy tightening ahead. This uncertainty was reflected in the dispersion in survey respondents’ average proba- bility distribution for the target range at the end of 2023. Regarding the outlook for runoff of the Federal Re- serve’s securities holdings, market participants widely expected the Committee to announce the commence- ment of balance sheet runoff at the current meeting. Median survey responses suggested that most market participants anticipated maximum redemption caps of $60 billion per month for Treasury securities and $35 billion per month for agency mortgage-backed secu- rities (MBS), with the caps phased in over roughly three months. Survey responses continued to reflect substan- tial dispersion in views on the level of System Open Mar- ket Account (SOMA) holdings at which balance sheet runoff would end. The manager turned next to a discussion of U.S. finan- cial market developments. Financial conditions tight- ened notably over the period. Treasury yields increased across the curve, with the rise primarily reflecting higher real interest rates. Longer-term private borrowing rates also moved higher, with 30-year fixed-rate mortgage rates rising above 5 percent to the highest levels in over a decade. Equity indexes ended the period substantially lower, on net. These indexes moved up earlier in the period in connection with a perceived reduction in tail risks stemming from the war in Ukraine but then moved lower, reportedly because of increased caution regarding 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 4 Attended the discussion of economic developments and out- look. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the economic outlook amid the expected tightening in U.S. monetary policy. The dollar appreciated, leaving the broad trade-weighted dollar up around 2 percent over the period. Viewed over a longer time horizon, fi- nancial conditions, as measured by many financial con- ditions indexes, had tightened by historically large amounts since the beginning of the year. Market- and survey-based measures of U.S. inflation ex- pectations continued to project a significant deceleration in inflation in the coming years. Nonetheless, far-for- ward inflation compensation rose over the period, and market participants remained attentive to the risk that, in bringing inflation back to 2 percent, the Committee would need to tighten by more than currently expected. In global financial developments, many advanced-econ- omy central banks raised policy rates over the period, and investors increasingly came to anticipate tighter monetary policy ahead in most advanced foreign econo- mies. The Bank of Japan was an exception and was widely anticipated to maintain its accommodative poli- cies. The yen depreciated 9 percent against the dollar over the intermeeting period to its weakest level in over two decades. Emerging market (EM) currencies re- mained relatively resilient. Market participants focused on the spread of COVID-19 in China and the effect of zero-COVID policies, which had resulted in increasingly widespread lockdowns. The renminbi depreciated against the dollar around 4 percent over the intermeeting period. The manager turned next to a discussion of develop- ments in money markets. The effective federal funds rate rose 25 basis points following the increase in the target range at the March FOMC meeting and remained stable throughout the period. Secured overnight rates also rose by 25 basis points following the March meet- ing, though modest softness emerged in subsequent days. Market participants noted that ongoing uncer- tainty about the near-term path of Federal Reserve pol- icy had increased demand for very short-dated invest- ments. This demand, combined with declining Treasury bill supply, contributed to the downward pressure on se- cured rates and to rising overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) usage. The manager expected that ON RRP usage could remain elevated in coming months but anticipated that, over the longer term, usage would decline as balance sheet reduction proceeded. The manager indicated that the Desk was prepared to implement the Committee’s plan for balance sheet re- duction and that, in the event that the Committee an- nounced the plan at the end of the current meeting, the Desk would issue a statement and FAQs providing the public with details regarding the implementation of the plan. The Desk would closely monitor market condi- tions and update the Committee during the runoff pro- cess. The deputy SOMA manager reviewed developments concerning Desk operations. The Desk planned to in- crease the publication frequency of data on ON RRP us- age. This additional information would provide the pub- lic with greater transparency about usage of the ON RRP facility. The Desk planned to publish the SOMA annual report soon. In addition to the detailed review of open market operations over 2021, the report would include updated illustrative projections of the size and composi- tion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over coming years. With respect to other operational matters, the Desk continued to work on details of plans for agency MBS CUSIP (Committee on Uniform Security Identifi- cation Procedures) aggregation and anticipated that this process would begin in coming months. Finally, the deputy manager requested that the Committee vote to maintain the standing U.S. dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements and to renew the reciprocal currency arrangements with Canada and Mexico under the North American Framework Agreement. In their discussion, participants widely agreed that the standing swap lines are a critical tool allowing the Federal Reserve to address global dollar funding pressures that could otherwise adversely affect the U.S. economy. The Committee voted unanimously to renew the recip- rocal currency arrangements with the Bank of Canada and the Bank of Mexico; these arrangements are associ- ated with the Federal Reserve’s participation in the North American Framework Agreement of 1994. In ad- dition, the Committee voted unanimously to renew the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss Na- tional Bank. The votes to renew the Federal Reserve’s participation in these standing arrangements occur an- nually at the April or May FOMC meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the May 3–4 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of May 3–4, 2022Page 3 (GDP) declined in the first quarter. However, first-quar- ter growth in private domestic final demand was faster than in the previous quarter, while labor market condi- tions tightened further in March. Consumer price infla- tion through March—as measured by the 12-month per- centage change in the price index for personal consump- tion expenditures (PCE)—remained elevated. Total nonfarm payroll employment rose in March, and the unemployment rate declined to 3.6 percent. The un- employment rates for African Americans and for His- panics moved lower, though both rates remained notice- ably higher than the national average. The labor force participation rate increased in March, as did the employ- ment-to-population ratio. The private-sector job open- ings rate, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, remained elevated. The employment cost index of hourly compensation in the private sector rose 4.8 percent over the 12 months ending in March; this gain was much larger than the corresponding 12-month changes posted in each of the preceding four years and was the largest 12-month increase since 1990. Consumer prices continued to rise rapidly. Total PCE price inflation was 6.6 percent over the 12 months end- ing in March, and core PCE price inflation, which ex- cludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 5.2 percent over the same pe- riod. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 3.7 percent in March, 2 percentage points higher than its year-earlier rate of increase. A new ver- sion of the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, moved up in the first quarter and was at the upper end of the range of values seen since 2005. Both real PCE and residential investment increased in the first quarter at rates similar to those seen in the fourth quarter of 2021. Business fixed investment growth picked up sharply in the first quarter, with spend- ing on equipment and intellectual property products posting a large increase. Inventory investment moved lower after surging in the fourth quarter of 2021, and total real government purchases declined further, led by a drop in defense purchases. The U.S. international trade deficit widened further in the first quarter of this year, and net exports made a large negative contribution to real U.S. GDP growth. Goods imports continued the fourth quarter’s strong growth, driven by large increases in real imports of consumer goods, capital goods, and automotive products. By con- trast, real exports of goods fell back after rising briskly late last year, with broad-based declines in most major categories. Both real exports and imports of services grew at a moderate pace in the first quarter, though both were held back by a tepid recovery in international travel amid ongoing waves of COVID-19. Data suggested that foreign economic growth remained solid in the first quarter, as most economies continued to show adaptability to new COVID-19 waves. Chinese data for March and April, however, showed declines in manufacturing and services activity and worsening sup- ply bottlenecks after Chinese authorities locked down Shanghai and other cities to combat the spread of the Omicron variant. The ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine also left its imprint on foreign economies, with consumer and business sentiment declining in Europe and global prices of a range of commodities continuing to rise. Foreign inflation increased significantly further, driven by surging energy and food prices as well as some broadening of price pressures to core goods and ser- vices. In response, many central banks around the world tightened their monetary policy stances. Staff Review of the Financial Situation U.S. Treasury yields and the market-implied federal funds rate path moved substantially higher over the in- termeeting period as Federal Reserve communications and domestic economic data releases were perceived as suggesting that a more aggressive tightening of monetary policy was likely over coming months. Sovereign yields in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) also increased notably. Broad domestic equity price indexes declined on net, and the one-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—remained elevated. Short-term funding markets were stable, while participa- tion in the ON RRP facility increased further. Amid the increase in Treasury yields, borrowing costs increased in many sectors and were at or somewhat above pre-pan- demic levels. Since the March FOMC meeting, 2-, 5-, and 10-year Treasury yields increased significantly on net. The in- creases in nominal Treasury yields were primarily ac- counted for by rising real yields, while inflation compen- sation implied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities was little changed. Alongside moves in shorter-term Treasury yields, the expected federal funds rate path— implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes—rose notably since the March FOMC meeting. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Broad equity indexes decreased over the intermeeting period. Early in the period, equity prices increased, sup- ported by the robust pace of economic activity and re- duced market concerns about the implications for the global economy of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The initial sharp gains in stock prices were followed by larger declines later in the period, as longer-term interest rates rose substantially and as some disappointing earnings re- ports toward the end of the intermeeting period weighed on equity prices. The VIX declined substantially early in the period but ended the period little changed on net, remaining at elevated levels. Similarly, spreads on invest- ment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed moderately earlier in the intermeeting period and then widened, ending the period only slightly narrower, on net, and below the median of their historical distribution. Spreads on municipal bonds were up modestly and stood at about the 90th percentile of their historical dis- tribution. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period, with the March in- crease in the Federal Reserve’s administered rates pass- ing through to overnight money market rates. Secured overnight rates softened later in the period, with down- ward pressure on rates attributed to continuing declines in net Treasury bill issuance, increased activity in certain segments of the repo market that tend to trade at lower rates, and money market funds continuing to shorten portfolio maturities amid uncertainty about the pace of anticipated policy rate increases. Consistent with the downward pressure on repo rates, daily take-up in the ON RRP facility remained elevated. Spreads on most types of longer-tenor commercial pa- per and negotiable certificates of deposit narrowed, re- portedly reflecting reduced market concerns about the effects of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, although some of the spreads remained slightly wider than those seen earlier this year. Over the intermeeting period, sovereign yields in AFEs increased notably because of concerns about further in- flationary pressures, some central bank communications that were perceived as less accommodative than ex- pected, and spillovers from rises in U.S. Treasury yields. Prospects of tighter monetary policy and COVID-re- lated lockdowns in China weighed on prices of risky as- sets, but investor concerns surrounding the economic effects of the war in Ukraine seemed to abate partially. On balance, major foreign equity indexes registered mixed and relatively modest changes. The U.S. dollar generally strengthened, with a more pronounced dollar appreciation against AFE currencies, as U.S. Treasury yields generally rose more than their AFE counterparts. Among EM currencies, the dollar appreciated signifi- cantly against the Chinese renminbi. Over the intermeeting period, along with the increase in Treasury yields, borrowing costs increased in many sec- tors and were at or somewhat above pre-pandemic lev- els. Credit remained widely available, and borrower credit quality continued to be strong overall. Borrowing costs for residential mortgage loans increased substantially, with the 30-year mortgage offer rates reaching levels not seen since 2010. This increase largely reflected the rise in the 10-year Treasury yield. Corpo- rate bond yields also increased, although the effect of the increase in Treasury yields was partly offset by narrower spreads. Municipal bond yields also increased notably. Bank loan rates for commercial borrowers increased and rates on large syndicated loans were roughly in line with pre-pandemic levels. In consumer credit markets, rates on auto loans and new credit card offers continued to trend upward. Credit, which remained widely available for most types of borrowers, was broadly in line with pre-pandemic lev- els. Gross nonfinancial corporate bond issuance re- bounded sharply in March, mostly reflecting an increase in investment-grade issuance, while gross institutional leveraged loan issuance slowed amid elevated geopoliti- cal uncertainty. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans and commercial real estate (CRE) loans on bank balance sheets also grew robustly in March. Respondents in the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Prac- tices (SLOOS) reported a continued easing of lending terms and strengthening demand for C&I loans as well as easing standards for multifamily CRE loans. For most small businesses, credit appeared to be availa- ble, although these businesses’ demand for credit report- edly remained weak. In the April SLOOS, large banks reported unchanged standards on C&I loans to small firms, while small banks tightened standards modestly to such firms. In consumer credit markets, credit card balances grew strongly in the first quarter amid easing standards and greater utilization, and auto credit outstanding continued to grow steadily through February despite vehicle pro- duction shortfalls and low vehicle inventories. Residen- tial mortgage credit conditions remained accommoda- _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of May 3–4, 2022Page 5 tive through March, despite the increase in mortgage in- terest rates, particularly for stronger borrowers who met standard loan criteria. The credit quality of firms, municipalities, and house- holds remained strong overall. The volume of credit rat- ing upgrades for corporate bonds outpaced downgrades moderately in March, continuing a nearly yearlong pat- tern. The credit quality of C&I loans on banks’ books continued to be strong as delinquency and default rates both remained low. Delinquency rates on bank and nonbank loans to small businesses edged down in Feb- ruary, while in the CRE sector, borrower financial health continued to recover. Household credit quality re- mained strong, and delinquency rates across both prime and nonprime borrowers continued to be subdued by historical standards. The staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system. The staff judged that, amid a substantial upward shift in interest rates, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and ongoing disruptions to supply chains, the financial system—outside of commodities markets—had been resilient. However, larger or pro- longed disruptions in commodities markets could inter- fere with other markets and real activity more broadly. To date, however, such potential spillovers appeared to be limited. The staff noted that increased uncertainty and ongoing volatility had reduced risk appetite in financial markets and eased price pressures, although valuations of many assets remained elevated. CRE valuations appeared somewhat elevated except for sectors that were affected most by the pandemic. Residential house prices had risen rapidly, although the staff continued to see key dif- ferences from the previous debt-fueled housing boom: The mortgage finance reforms enacted after 2008 lim- ited the potential for significant deterioration in under- writing standards, most new mortgage debt had been added by borrowers with prime credit scores, and home- owners’ equity positions were healthy. The staff assessed that aggregate household and business leverage was moderate. Households’ debt-to-GDP ratio remained relatively low, and there were few signs of in- creased stress among lower-income households. Busi- ness debt remained elevated relative to its pre-pandemic history, but interest coverage ratios were high. The staff assessed that vulnerabilities arising from finan- cial leverage remained moderate on balance. Despite market volatility, the banking sector continued to be well capitalized with strong liquidity. The staff noted that leverage at key nonbank financial institutions (NBFIs) was elevated and that bank lending to NBFIs continued to increase notably. Relatedly, NBFIs’ reliance on bank credit lines to meet unexpected liquidity needs could generate moderate liquidity pressures at large banks dur- ing times of financial stress. With regard to funding risk, the staff highlighted structural vulnerabilities in some types of mutual funds as a continuing focus. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the May FOMC meeting implied a trajectory for real GDP that was broadly similar to the March pro- jection. The staff noted that the first-quarter decline in real GDP was driven by categories of spending that had often been volatile in the past, and they viewed the con- tinued strength in private domestic final demand, the la- bor market, and industrial production as providing a more accurate picture of the economy’s direction in the first quarter. The staff therefore anticipated that GDP growth would rebound in the second quarter and ad- vance at a solid pace over the remainder of the year. GDP growth was then expected to slow in 2023 and 2024 as monetary policy became less accommodative and financial conditions tightened further; by 2024, real GDP growth was expected to be in line with potential output growth. However, the level of real GDP was ex- pected to remain well above potential over the projec- tion period, and labor market conditions were expected to remain very tight. The staff’s projection for PCE price inflation was re- vised up slightly in the second half of 2022 and in 2023 in response to the slow resolution of supply constraints seen over the first part of 2022, a higher projected path for import prices, and a judgment that wage increases would put more upward pressure on services prices than previously assumed. All told, total PCE price inflation was expected to be 4.3 percent in 2022. PCE price in- flation was then expected to step down to 2.5 percent in 2023 and to 2.1 percent in 2024 as supply–demand im- balances in the economy were reduced by slowing aggre- gate demand and an anticipated easing of supply con- straints. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks to the inflation projection were skewed to the upside. The war in Ukraine was seen as a possible source of even greater upward pressure on energy and commodity prices, while the war and adverse develop- ments associated with rising COVID infections in China were both perceived as increasing the risk that supply Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ chain disruptions and production constraints would be further exacerbated in the United States and abroad. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that, although overall economic activity had edged down in the first quarter, household spending and business fixed investment had remained strong. Job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate had declined substantially. Inflation re- mained elevated, reflecting continued supply and de- mand imbalances, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. Participants recognized that the inva- sion of Ukraine by Russia was causing tremendous hu- man and economic hardship for the Ukrainian people. Participants judged that the implications for the U.S. economy were highly uncertain. The invasion and re- lated events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were likely to weigh on economic activity. In addition, participants judged that COVID-related lockdowns in China were likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. Against this background, participants stated that they were highly attentive to inflation risks. Participants commented that after its rapid growth in the last quarter of 2021, real GDP had declined in the first quarter of this year, with net exports and inventory in- vestment making large negative contributions to growth. They noted, however, that these volatile components tended to contain little signal about subsequent growth and that household spending and business fixed invest- ment had remained strong in the first quarter. These advances and the further tightening of labor market con- ditions were judged consistent with significant underly- ing momentum in the domestic economy. In line with this judgment, participants expected that real GDP would grow solidly in the current quarter. In their dis- cussion of the economic outlook beyond the near term, participants indicated that they expected that output would expand more moderately this year than in 2021, with growth this year likely near or above its longer-run rate, and that the imbalance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply would diminish over time. Partic- ipants saw an appropriate firming of monetary policy as playing a central role in addressing this imbalance and in supporting the Federal Reserve’s goals of maximum em- ployment and price stability. An easing of supply bottle- necks, a further rise in labor force participation, and the waning effects of pandemic-related fiscal policy support were cited as additional factors that could help reduce the supply–demand imbalances in the economy and lower inflation over the medium term. That said, the timing and magnitude of these effects were uncertain. Participants recognized the need to adjust the stance of policy depending on how these and other factors played out over time. In their discussion of the household sector, participants indicated that they expected robust growth in consump- tion spending. They pointed to several elements sup- porting this outlook, including strong household balance sheets, wide availability of jobs, and the U.S. economy’s resilience in the face of new waves of the virus. The considerable increases in Treasury yields across maturi- ties over the intermeeting period were associated with rising interest rates faced by households, particularly rates on home mortgages. A couple of participants re- ported that their business contacts continued to see ro- bust housing demand and elevated home prices despite higher mortgage interest rates. With respect to the business sector, participants cited ro- bust consumer demand, healthy household balance sheets, and inventory rebuilding as factors supportive of business activity and investment. The ability of firms to meet demand continued to be limited by labor shortages and supply chain bottlenecks. Although some partici- pants noted that their business contacts had reported an easing of supply constraints, participants assessed that supply constraints overall were still significant and would likely take some time to be resolved. In addition, the invasion of Ukraine by Russia and COVID-related lockdowns in China were seen as likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. A few participants indicated that some of their business contacts were reportedly hes- itant to expand capacity or had postponed construction projects. Participants commented that demand for labor contin- ued to outstrip available supply across many parts of the economy and that their business contacts continued to report difficulties in hiring and retaining workers. They observed that various indicators pointed to a very tight labor market. Employment growth had continued at a strong pace, the unemployment rate had fallen to a near- 50-year low, quits and job openings had remained ex- tremely elevated, and nominal wages had continued to rise rapidly. A few participants noted that there were signs that the pandemic-related factors that had held back labor supply might be abating further, especially in the case of prime-age workers. In addition, a few other participants suggested that the unwelcome erosion of real incomes due to high inflation may have contributed to the increase in labor supply. Many participants indi- cated that they expected the labor market to remain tight _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of May 3–4, 2022Page 7 and wage pressures to stay elevated for some time. Sev- eral participants raised the possibility that, in light of the exceptionally high ratio of vacancies to job searchers, a moderation in labor demand might serve to reduce va- cancies and wage pressures without having significant ef- fects on the unemployment rate. Participants observed that inflation continued to run well above the Committee’s longer-run goal and that in- flation pressures were evident in a broad array of goods and services. Various participants remarked on the hardship caused by elevated inflation and heightened in- flation uncertainty—including by eroding American families’ real incomes and wealth and by making it more difficult for businesses to make production and invest- ment plans. They also pointed out that high inflation could impede the achievement of maximum employ- ment on a sustained basis. Participants noted that devel- opments associated with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, including surges in energy and commodity prices, were adding to near-term inflation pressures. In addition, COVID-related lockdowns in China were likely to dis- rupt global supply chains, potentially adding further up- ward pressure on the prices paid by U.S. businesses and consumers. Most participants indicated that their busi- ness contacts had continued to report that substantial in- creases in wages and input prices were being passed through into higher prices to their customers. A few participants added that some of their contacts were start- ing to report that higher prices were hurting sales. A number of participants observed that recent monthly data might suggest that overall price pressures may no longer be worsening. These participants also empha- sized that price pressures remained elevated and that it was too early to be confident that inflation had peaked. Many participants commented that measures of short- term inflation expectations were elevated or that far-for- ward measures of inflation compensation were near the upper edge of their historical range. Several participants judged that measures of longer-term inflation expecta- tions derived from surveys of households, professional forecasters, and market participants still appeared to be broadly consistent with the Committee’s longer-run in- flation objective, likely reflecting respondents’ confi- dence that the Federal Reserve would take the actions necessary to return inflation to 2 percent. They noted that, together with appropriate firming of monetary pol- icy and an eventual easing of supply constraints, well- anchored longer-term inflation expectations would sup- port a return of inflation to levels consistent with the Committee’s longer-run goal. In their discussion of risks to the outlook, participants emphasized that they were highly attentive to inflation risks and would continue to monitor closely inflation de- velopments and inflation expectations. They agreed that risks to inflation were skewed to the upside and cited several such risks, including those associated with ongo- ing supply bottlenecks and rising energy and commodity prices—both of which were exacerbated by the Russian invasion of Ukraine and COVID-related lockdowns in China. Also mentioned were the risks associated with nominal wage growth continuing to run above levels consistent with 2 percent inflation over time and the ex- tent to which households’ high savings since the onset of the pandemic and healthy balance sheets would sup- port greater-than-expected underlying momentum in consumer spending and contribute to upside inflation pressures. In addition, some participants emphasized that persistently high inflation heightened the risk that longer-term inflation expectations could become unan- chored; in that case, the task of returning inflation to 2 percent would be more difficult. Uncertainty about real activity was also seen as elevated. Various partici- pants noted downside risks to the outlook, including risks associated with the Russian invasion and COVID- related lockdowns in China and the likelihood of a pro- longed rise in energy and commodity prices. Several participants who commented on issues related to financial stability noted that the tightening of monetary policy could interact with vulnerabilities related to the liquidity of markets for Treasury securities and to the private sector’s intermediation capacity. A couple of participants pointed to increased risks in financial mar- kets linked to commodities following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which had led to higher prices and volatility across a wide range of energy, agricultural, and metal products. These participants observed that the trading and risk-management practices of some key participants in commodities markets were not fully visible to regula- tory authorities and noted that central counterparties (CCPs) needed to remain capable of managing risks as- sociated with heightened volatility or that margin re- quirements at CCPs could give rise to significant liquid- ity demands for large banks, broker-dealers, and their cli- ents. In their consideration of the appropriate stance of mon- etary policy, all participants concurred that the U.S. economy was very strong, the labor market was ex- tremely tight, and inflation was very high and well above the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. Against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appro- priate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 50 basis points at this meeting. They further anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be warranted to achieve the Commit- tee’s objectives. Participants also agreed that it was ap- propriate to start reducing the size of the Federal Re- serve’s balance sheet on June 1, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that would be issued in conjunction with the postmeeting statement. Participants judged that an ap- propriate firming of the stance of monetary policy, along with an eventual waning of supply–demand imbalances, would help to keep longer-term inflation expectations anchored and bring inflation down over time to levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal. All participants reaffirmed their strong commitment and determination to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. To this end, participants agreed that the Committee should expeditiously move the stance of monetary policy toward a neutral posture, through both increases in the target range for the federal funds rate and reductions in the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal- ance sheet. Most participants judged that 50 basis point increases in the target range would likely be appropriate at the next couple of meetings. Many participants as- sessed that the Committee’s previous communications had been helpful in shifting market expectations regard- ing the policy outlook into better alignment with the Committee’s assessment and had contributed to the tightening of financial conditions. All participants supported the plans for reducing the size of the balance sheet. This reduction, starting on June 1, would work in parallel with increases in the target range for the policy rate in firming the stance of monetary pol- icy. A number of participants remarked that, after bal- ance sheet runoff was well under way, it would be ap- propriate for the Committee to consider sales of agency MBS to enable suitable progress toward a longer-run SOMA portfolio composed primarily of Treasury secu- rities. Any program of sales of agency MBS would be announced well in advance. Regarding risks related to the balance sheet reduction, several participants noted the potential for unanticipated effects on financial mar- ket conditions. Participants agreed that the economic outlook was highly uncertain and that policy decisions should be data dependent and focused on returning inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent goal while sustaining strong labor market conditions. At present, participants judged that it was important to move expeditiously to a more neutral monetary policy stance. They also noted that a restric- tive stance of policy may well become appropriate de- pending on the evolving economic outlook and the risks to the outlook. Participants observed that developments associated with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the COVID-related lockdowns in China posed heightened risks for both the United States and economies around the world. Several participants commented on the chal- lenges that monetary policy faced in restoring price sta- bility while also maintaining strong labor market condi- tions. In light of the high degree of uncertainty sur- rounding the economic outlook, participants judged that risk-management considerations would be important in deliberations over time regarding the appropriate policy stance. Many participants judged that expediting the re- moval of policy accommodation would leave the Com- mittee well positioned later this year to assess the effects of policy firming and the extent to which economic de- velopments warranted policy adjustments. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that, although overall economic activity had edged down in the first quarter, household spending and business fixed investment had remained strong. Job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate had declined substantially. Members also agreed that inflation remained elevated, reflecting con- tinued supply and demand imbalances, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. Members concurred that the invasion of Ukraine by Russia was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. Members judged that the implications of the war for the U.S. economy were highly uncertain. Mem- bers agreed that the invasion and related events were cre- ating additional upward pressure on inflation and were likely to weigh on economic activity. Members also agreed that COVID-related lockdowns in China were likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. In light of continuing inflation risks, members judged that it would be appropriate for the postmeeting statement to note that the Committee is highly attentive to the upside risks to inflation. In their assessment of the monetary policy stance neces- sary for achieving the Committee’s maximum-employ- ment and price-stability goals, members agreed that, with appropriate firming in the stance of monetary pol- icy, they expected inflation to return to the Committee’s 2 percent objective and the labor market to remain strong. In support of these goals, the Committee de- cided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of May 3–4, 2022Page 9 to ¾ to 1 percent and anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate. In addition, the Committee decided to begin reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mort- gage-backed securities on June 1, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Bal- ance Sheet that were issued in conjunction with the postmeeting statement. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. They also concurred that their assessments would take into account a wide range of in- formation, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international develop- ments. Following the monetary policy discussion, which in- cluded a consideration of plans for reducing the size of the balance sheet, all participants indicated support for the proposed plans for reducing the size of the balance sheet. The Committee voted unanimously to adopt the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Bal- ance Sheet, as shown below. PLANS FOR REDUCING THE SIZE OF THE FED- ERAL RESERVE’S BALANCE SHEET (as adopted effective May 4, 2022) Consistent with the Principles for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in January 2022, all Committee participants agreed to the following plans for significantly reducing the Federal Re- serve’s securities holdings. • The Committee intends to reduce the Fed- eral Reserve’s securities holdings over time in a predictable manner primarily by adjust- ing the amounts reinvested of principal pay- ments received from securities held in the System Open Market Account (SOMA). Beginning on June 1, principal payments from securities held in the SOMA will be reinvested to the extent that they exceed monthly caps. o For Treasury securities, the cap will in- itially be set at $30 billion per month and after three months will increase to $60 billion per month. The decline in holdings of Treasury securities under this monthly cap will include Treasury coupon securities and, to the extent that coupon maturities are less than the monthly cap, Treasury bills. o For agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities, the cap will initially be set at $17.5 billion per month and after three months will increase to $35 billion per month. • Over time, the Committee intends to main- tain securities holdings in amounts needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample reserves regime. o To ensure a smooth transition, the Committee intends to slow and then stop the decline in the size of the bal- ance sheet when reserve balances are somewhat above the level it judges to be consistent with ample reserves. o Once balance sheet runoff has ceased, reserve balances will likely continue to decline for a time, reflecting growth in other Federal Reserve liabilities, until the Committee judges that reserve bal- ances are at an ample level. o Thereafter, the Committee will manage securities holdings as needed to main- tain ample reserves over time. • The Committee is prepared to adjust any of the details of its approach to reducing the size of the balance sheet in light of eco- nomic and financial developments. After adopting the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective May 5, 2022, the Federal Open Mar- ket Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of ¾ to 1 percent. • Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 1.0 percent and with an aggregate opera- tion limit of $500 billion; the aggregate op- eration limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.8 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-coun- terparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction the amount of princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing in the calendar month of June that exceeds a monthly cap of $30 billion. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the ex- tent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency MBS re- ceived in the calendar month of June that exceeds a monthly cap of $17.5 billion. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Although overall economic activity edged down in the first quarter, household spending and business fixed investment remained strong. Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined sub- stantially. Inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. The invasion of Ukraine by Russia is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. The implications for the U.S. economy are highly uncertain. The invasion and related events are creating additional upward pressure on inflation and are likely to weigh on economic activity. In addition, COVID-related lock- downs in China are likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. The Committee is highly at- tentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, the Committee expects inflation to return to its 2 percent ob- jective and the labor market to remain strong. In support of these goals, the Committee de- cided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to ¾ to 1 percent and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be ap- propriate. In addition, the Committee decided to begin reducing its holdings of Treasury secu- rities and agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities on June 1, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Re- serve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in con- junction with this statement. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Esther L. George, Patrick Harker, Loretta J. Mester, and Christopher J. Waller. Patrick Harker voted as an alternate member at this meeting. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 0.90 percent, effective May 5, 2022. The Board of Gov- ernors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of May 3–4, 2022Page 11 to approve a ½ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 1 percent, effective May 5, 2022.5 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 14–15, 2022. The meeting adjourned at 10:15 a.m. on May 4, 2022. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on April 5, 2022, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on March 15–16, 2022. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 5 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleve- land, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee June 14–15, 2022 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, June 14, 2022, at 11:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 15, 2022, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Lisa D. Cook Esther L. George Philip N. Jefferson Loretta J. Mester Christopher J. Waller Meredith Black, Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Naureen Hassan, and Neel Kashkari, Alternate Members of the Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively Kenneth C. Montgomery, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Brian M. Doyle, Carlos Garriga, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellis W. Tallman, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Jon Faust and Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Advisers to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board Burcu Duygan-Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, Nitish R. Sinha, and Paul R. Wood, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Marnie Gillis DeBoer3 and David López-Salido, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Diana Hancock and John J. Stevens, Senior Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Edward Nelson and Robert J. Tetlow,4 Senior Advisers, James P. Bergin, Marc Giannoni, Giovanni Olivei, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Christopher J. Gust, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Paolo A. Pesenti, and Robert G. Valletta, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Dallas, Boston, New York, and San Francisco, respectively Shane M. Sherlund, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Roc Armenter, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Giovanni Favara and Etienne Gagnon,3 Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Paul Lengermann and Byron Lutz, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board; Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Alyssa Arute,2 Manager, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Ayelen Banegas and Anna Orlik,3 Principal Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Stephen F. Lin, Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Giovanni Nicolò, Arsenios Skaperdas, and Hiroatsu Tanaka, Senior Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Cisil Sarisoy, Senior Economist, Division of International Finance, Board Achilles Sangster II, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board David Na, Senior Financial Institution and Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board Kathleen O. Paese, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Michelle M. Neal, and Anna Paulson, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, New York, and Chicago, respectively 4 Attended from the discussion of the economic and financial situation through the end of Wednesday’s session. Alisdair G. McKay, Senior Research Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) turned first to a discussion of financial devel- opments. Over the intermeeting period, there were sig- nificant swings in asset prices, and financial conditions tightened, on net, as market participants assessed incom- ing information about the economy. In the United States, near-term policy rate expectations shifted mark- edly toward the end of the period, particularly after the release of the May consumer price index (CPI) report. Ahead of the release of the report, market expectations reflected a broad consensus that there would be 50 basis point rate increases at both the June and July FOMC meetings. After the release of the higher-than-expected inflation data, policy-sensitive rates pointed instead to a considerable probability of 75 basis point moves at both the June and July meetings. The market-implied path of the federal funds rate moved higher at longer horizons as well. Market participants noted elevated uncertainty about the economic and monetary policy outlook. Across the yield curve, rates on nominal Treasury secu- rities ended the period significantly higher, primarily re- flecting the revision in the outlook for monetary policy and the associated rise in real yields. Market-based measures of inflation compensation continued to indi- cate expectations that inflation would decline notably in coming quarters, and measures of medium-term infla- tion compensation fell over the intermeeting period. Market participants reported that while liquidity condi- tions in the market for Treasury securities had been af- fected by the elevated volatility in rates and larger trades were having an increased effect on pricing, overall mar- ket functioning had held up. Responding to higher in- Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ terest rates and some concerns about the growth out- look, equity prices moved substantially lower over the period. The manager turned next to a discussion of develop- ments related to foreign central banks. Most major for- eign central banks were proceeding on a path of remov- ing policy accommodation in order to address elevated levels of inflation. Several—including those of Canada, Australia, and New Zealand—had raised their policy rates 50 basis points over the intermeeting period, and some signaled the potential need for more forceful tight- ening in order to address inflation risks. The European Central Bank (ECB) announced an end to its asset pur- chase program and signaled an intention to lift policy rates in July. Meanwhile, the stance of monetary policy in Japan was generally expected to remain highly accom- modative, though recent upward pressure on Japanese government bond yields had led the Bank of Japan (BOJ) to step up its efforts to defend its yield curve con- trol target. On balance, market participants were fo- cused on the largely synchronous shift toward monetary policy tightening across most advanced economies. Regarding money market developments, the manager noted that the 50 basis point increase in the target range at the May FOMC meeting passed through to the effec- tive federal funds rate and was also transmitted to other overnight rates. The federal funds rate held steady at 83 basis points throughout the period, while the Secured Overnight Financing Rate softened, on net, falling to the bottom of the federal funds target range later in the pe- riod. Contacts attributed the downward pressure on se- cured rates to high liquidity levels and declining Treasury bill supply, as well as elevated uncertainty about the in- terest rate path, which had increased demand for short- term investments. In this environment, participation in the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility increased, and a greater share of activity in over- night private repurchase agreement (repo) markets was conducted by lenders who lacked access to the facility. The manager noted that, if ON RRP usage continued to rise, it may be appropriate at some point to consider fur- ther lifting the per-counterparty limit. Over the longer term, ON RRP usage was expected to fall, with the re- duction in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet resulting in a gradual rise in money market rates relative to the ON RRP rate. The deputy manager turned next to a discussion of Fed- eral Reserve operations and related topics. In accord- ance with the directive to the Open Market Desk, the reduction in SOMA securities holdings began in June, under the initial monthly caps on redemptions of $30 billion for Treasury securities and $17.5 billion for agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Under current staff projections, the SOMA portfolio was anticipated to decline roughly $400 billion by the end of 2022. As noted in the recent SOMA an- nual report and reported in the Board’s first-quarter fi- nancial statements for the Federal Reserve System, the SOMA portfolio had an unrealized loss, reflecting the increase in longer-term interest rates. Unrealized losses had no implications for Federal Reserve income and would eventually fall to zero as securities reached ma- turity. The staff projected that SOMA net income would decline and potentially turn negative, with increases in the target range lifting the interest expense on some lia- bilities, and that this eventuality could result in a deferred asset entry on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Nei- ther unrealized losses on the Federal Reserve’s existing securities portfolio nor negative net income would im- pair the implementation of monetary policy or the Fed- eral Reserve’s ability to achieve its dual-mandate objec- tives. On other operational matters, the deputy manager noted that, over the intermeeting period, the Desk onboarded three depository institutions as new counterparties for the standing repo facility (SRF), resulting in a total of nine depository institutions approved, to date, as SRF counterparties. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the June 14–15 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) was rebounding to a moderate rate of increase in the second quarter after having declined in the first quar- ter. The labor market remained very tight, but there were some signs that momentum was slowing. Con- sumer price inflation—as measured by the 12‑month percentage change in the price index for personal con- sumption expenditures (PCE)—remained elevated in April, and available information suggested that inflation was still elevated in May. Total nonfarm payroll employment rose solidly in April and May, though the pace of increase was slower than in the first quarter, and the unemployment rate remained unchanged at 3.6 percent. The unemployment rates for little African Americans and for Hispanics were Minutes of the Meeting of June 14–15, 2022Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ changed, on net, though both rates remained noticeably higher than the national average. On net, the labor force participation rate edged down between March and May, while the employment-to-population ratio was un- changed. The private-sector job openings rate, as meas- ured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, edged lower in April but remained at a high level. Nom- inal wage growth remained elevated, with average hourly earnings having risen 5.2 percent over the 12 months ending in May, and the increases were widespread across industries. Consumer price inflation remained elevated. Total PCE price inflation was 6.3 percent over the 12 months end- ing in April, and core PCE price inflation, which ex- cludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.9 percent over the same pe- riod. The trimmed mean measure of 12‑month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 3.8 percent in April, nearly 2 percentage points higher than its year-earlier rate of increase. In May, the 12-month change in the CPI was 8.6 percent, while core CPI inflation was 6.0 percent over the same period. Measures of inflation expectations derived from surveys of professional forecasters and of consumers generally suggested that inflation was expected to remain high in the short run but then fall back toward levels consistent with a longer-run rate of 2 percent. Production and spending indicators were mixed but gen- erally remained strong. Consumer spending and indus- trial production posted sizable gains in April. However, retail sales declined in May, data on home sales and sin- gle-family housing starts moved down in April, some in- dicators of manufacturing activity weakened in May, and the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers meas- ure of consumer sentiment decreased noticeably in the preliminary June reading. Supply disruptions appeared to have improved in some sectors (such as general mer- chandise retailers) but to have deteriorated in others (such as materials for home construction). On balance, the available indicators suggested that private domestic final purchases were increasing at a slower pace in the second quarter than in the first quarter. And with the available trade data for April pointing to a rebound in exports and a moderation in import growth in the sec- ond quarter, GDP growth appeared to be rebounding after having declined in the first quarter. Regarding trade, real imports of goods stepped back in April from their exceptional strength in March, driven by a decline in consumer goods imports. By contrast, real goods exports grew in both March and April after declining in the previous two months, following some normalization in categories such as soybeans and phar- maceuticals, which can exhibit large and idiosyncratic changes. Exports and imports of services continued to be held back by an incomplete recovery of international travel. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit wid- ened to a record size in March and then reversed that widening in April. Incoming data suggested that the global reverberations from lockdown measures to deal with the spread of the COVID-19 virus in China and the Russian invasion of Ukraine slowed foreign economic growth. In China, ac- tivity indicators pointed to a sizable restraint on eco- nomic activity. The Russian invasion of Ukraine contin- ued to have an imprint on foreign activity, with persis- tent stresses in global commodity markets and declining consumer and business confidence, especially in Europe. Inflation abroad moved higher, driven by further in- creases in consumer energy and food prices as well as some additional broadening of price pressures to core goods and services. Central banks around the world fur- ther tightened their monetary policy stances to curb high inflation. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, U.S. Treasury yields and the market-implied federal funds rate path moved sub- stantially higher on net. Broad domestic equity price in- dexes declined considerably, on balance, amid elevated market volatility. In most advanced foreign economies (AFEs), sovereign yields also increased further, and for- eign equity price indexes moved lower. Despite further increases in borrowing costs, financing conditions in do- mestic credit markets remained generally accommoda- tive. The credit quality of firms, municipalities, and households remained largely stable, although the out- look for credit quality had begun to deteriorate some- what. Since the previous FOMC meeting, 2-, 5-, and 10-year nominal Treasury yields increased considerably on net. Early in the intermeeting period, Treasury yields moved lower amid rising concerns about a weakening U.S. growth outlook and Federal Reserve communications perceived as lowering the chances of large policy rate hikes at upcoming meetings. However, yields increased late in the period, with economic data releases largely be- ing interpreted as highlighting the possibility of a more aggressive tightening of monetary policy. The expected federal funds rate path—implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes—also increased notably on balance. Real yields increased more than their nominal Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ counterparts, while inflation compensation implied by Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities declined. Broad equity price indexes fell sharply over the inter- meeting period on net. The stock price declines were largely associated with mixed corporate earnings news early in the period and increasing concerns about the economic outlook amid global policy tightening. One- month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index— the VIX—increased moderately, on balance, remaining elevated relative to its historical distribution and signifi- cantly above average pre-pandemic levels. Spreads on investment-grade and, to a greater extent, speculative- grade corporate bonds widened notably, on net, reach- ing levels comparable with those at the end of 2018. This widening of spreads was associated with increased concerns about the outlook for corporate credit amid monetary policy tightening. Since the previous FOMC meeting, spreads on municipal bonds narrowed substan- tially, on net, moving near levels observed for several years before the pandemic, as investor demand exhibited some recovery over much of the period from earlier weak levels. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period, with the May increase in the Federal Reserve’s administered rates passing through promptly to overnight money market rates. Spreads on longer-tenor commercial paper (CP) and ne- gotiable certificates of deposit narrowed moderately, with no signs of spillovers beyond the stablecoin market following the collapse of a large algorithmic stablecoin. Indeed, CP outstanding increased slightly over the pe- riod. Money market fund (MMF) net yields across all fund types rose notably, as increases in administered rates passed through to money market instruments. Se- cured overnight rates softened significantly relative to the ON RRP offering rate since the May FOMC meet- ing, with the downward pressure on rates attributed to continuing declines in net Treasury bill issuance, ele- vated demand for collateral in the form of Treasury se- curities, and MMFs maintaining very short portfolio ma- turities amid uncertainty about the pace of anticipated policy rate increases. Consistent with the downward pressure on repo rates, daily take-up in the ON RRP fa- cility increased further. Sovereign yields in most AFEs rose over the intermeet- ing period amid investors’ concerns about further infla- tionary pressures and major central banks’ policy com- munications suggesting a firmer stance of policy. Inter- est rate volatility in AFEs increased, consistent with in- creased uncertainty about the path of policy rates. Con- cerns about the global growth outlook weighed on eq- uity prices, and the broad dollar edged up. Implied eq- uity price volatility remained at elevated levels. Japanese yields and equity prices, however, ended the period about unchanged, as the BOJ reaffirmed its accommo- dative monetary policy stance. Sovereign bond spreads over German bund yields for euro-area peripheral coun- tries widened further. These moves were partially re- traced following an unscheduled meeting of the ECB on June 15, at which the ECB indicated that it would take action to address potential fragmentation risk in euro- area sovereign bond markets. Outflows from emerging market-dedicated funds intensified in early May, espe- cially from local currency bond funds, and credit spreads in emerging market economies widened moderately. In domestic credit markets, financing conditions for most businesses and households remained generally ac- commodative over the intermeeting period. Credit re- mained widely available, particularly to higher-rated firms and consumers with higher credit scores. Gross nonfinancial corporate bond issuance slowed in May, es- pecially among speculative-grade issuers, amid elevated market volatility and high yields. Gross institutional lev- eraged loan issuance decelerated and initial public offer- ing volumes remained extremely slow in May, while gross issuance of municipal bonds remained robust. Commercial and industrial (C&I) and commercial real estate (CRE) loans on banks’ balance sheets expanded at a rapid pace in April and May. Issuance of both agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) stepped down slightly in May from its strong pace earlier in the year. Small business loan originations through April were in line with pre-pandemic levels and indicated that credit appeared to be available. Residential mortgage credit remained widely available through May for most borrowers. While refinance vol- umes continued trending lower in April and May amid higher mortgage rates, outstanding balances of home eq- uity lines of credit at commercial banks posted the first significant increase in more than a decade, likely reflect- ing a substitution by homeowners away from cash-out refinances. In consumer credit markets, auto loans out- standing grew at a robust pace in the first quarter, con- sistent with a rebound in auto sales, but slowed in April and May. Credit card balances at commercial banks rose in April at the fastest pace seen in recent decades, but growth slowed in May. Minutes of the Meeting of June 14–15, 2022Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Borrowing costs had continued to increase in many sec- tors since the previous FOMC meeting. Yields on non- financial corporate bonds remained well above pre- pandemic levels, and new issuance spreads for institu- tional leveraged loans ticked up in May. Bank interest rates for both C&I and CRE loans also increased. Among small businesses that borrow on a regular basis, the share facing higher borrowing costs rose in both April and May. Borrowing costs for residential mortgage loans increased significantly over the intermeeting pe- riod, in line with the increases in MBS and Treasury yields, reaching their highest levels since 2010. In con- sumer credit markets, rates on auto loans and new credit card offers continued to trend upward. Despite the historically low volumes of defaults on both corporate bonds and leveraged loans in April, in the later weeks of the intermeeting period the volume of credit rating downgrades of leveraged loans exceeded the vol- ume of upgrades. In addition, market indicators of fu- ture default expectations of businesses deteriorated to some extent, as investors appeared to mark down their assessment of the macroeconomic outlook. Credit quality of business loans on banks’ books re- mained sound, with C&I and CRE delinquency rates continuing to be low through March. Nonetheless, banks allocated net positive loan loss provisions in the first quarter of this year. This development reversed a pattern of loan loss reserves being released throughout last year and reflected concerns about the credit quality outlook. Delinquency rates on CMBS and small busi- ness loans continued to decline, and the credit quality of municipal securities remained strong. Household credit quality remained solid, with the share of consumers with subprime credit scores still near his- torical lows. In addition, mortgage delinquencies and the share of mortgages in forbearance both continued to trend down in recent months. While nonprime auto loan delinquency rates edged down a touch in the first quarter, credit card delinquency rates for account hold- ers with below-prime credit scores inched up from low levels. The sizable increases in credit card purchase vol- umes through March were roughly offset by high levels of credit card payments, thus increasing household bor- rowing only slightly. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the June FOMC meeting implied a trajectory for real GDP that was lower than in the May projection. The staff continued to project that GDP growth would rebound in the second quarter and remain solid over the remainder of the year. However, monetary policy was assumed to be less accommodative than in the previous projection, and the recent and prospective tightening of financial conditions led the staff to reduce its GDP growth forecast for the second half of 2022 and for 2023. The level of real GDP was still expected to remain well above potential over the projection period, though the gap was projected to narrow significantly this year and to narrow a little further next year. Labor market conditions also were expected to remain very tight, albeit somewhat less so than in the previous projection. With regard to PCE price inflation, the staff revised up its projection for the second half of 2022 in response to stronger-than-expected wage growth and the staff’s as- sessment that the boost to inflation from supply– demand imbalances in the economy, including in food and energy markets, would be more persistent than pre- viously assumed. All told, total PCE price inflation was expected to be 5.0 percent in 2022, while core inflation was expected to be 4.1 percent. PCE price inflation was then expected to step down to 2.4 percent in 2023 and to 2.0 percent in 2024, as energy prices were forecast to decline and as supply–demand imbalances were pro- jected to diminish because of slowing aggregate demand and an easing of supply constraints. Similarly, core in- flation was projected to slow to 2.6 percent in 2023 and to 2.2 percent in 2024. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks to the inflation projection were skewed to the upside. The staff judged that the ongoing war in Ukraine remained a possible source of even greater up- ward pressure on energy and commodity prices, while the war and adverse developments associated with China’s zero-COVID policy were both perceived as in- creasing the risk that supply chain disruptions and pro- duction constraints would be further exacerbated in the United States and abroad. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2022 through 2024 and over the longer run based on their individual assessments of ap- propriate monetary policy, including the path of the fed- eral funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, un- der appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Eco- nomic Projections (SEP) was released to the public fol- lowing the conclusion of the meeting. Participants stressed the need to adjust the stance of pol- icy in response to incoming information regarding the evolution of these and other factors. In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that overall economic activity appeared to have picked up after edging down in the first quarter. Job gains had been robust in recent months, and the un- employment rate had remained low. Inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances re- lated to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. Participants recognized that the inva- sion of Ukraine by Russia was causing tremendous hu- man and economic hardship for the Ukrainian people. Participants judged that the invasion and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. In ad- dition, participants indicated that COVID-related lock- downs in China were likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. Against this background, participants stated that they were highly attentive to inflation risks. With regard to the economic outlook, participants noted that recent indicators suggested that real GDP growth was expanding in the current quarter, with consumption spending remaining strong. Participants generally judged that growth in business fixed investment ap- peared to be slowing, and activity in the housing sector appeared to be softening, in part as a result of a sharp rise in mortgage rates. Correspondingly, participants in- dicated that they had revised down their projections of real GDP growth for this year, consistent with ongoing supply chain disruptions and tighter financial conditions. Participants noted that the imbalance between supply and demand across a wide range of product markets was contributing to upward pressure on inflation. They saw an appropriate firming of monetary policy and associ- ated tighter financial conditions as playing a central role in helping address this imbalance and in supporting the Federal Reserve’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. An easing of supply bottlenecks, a further rise in labor force participation, and the waning effects of pandemic-related fiscal policy support were cited as additional factors that could help reduce the supply– demand imbalances in the economy and therefore lower inflation over the next few years. That said, the timing and magnitude of these effects were uncertain. Partici- pants saw little evidence to date of a substantial improve- ment in supply constraints, and some of them judged that the economic effects of these constraints were likely to persist longer than they had previously anticipated. In their discussion of the household sector, participants indicated that consumption spending had remained ro- bust, in part reflecting strong balance sheets in the household sector and a tight labor market. Several par- ticipants noted that household spending patterns ap- peared to be shifting away from goods to services. Sev- eral participants indicated that some of their contacts re- ported that the pace of consumer spending, though strong, was beginning to moderate. One reason cited for this moderation was that the purchasing power of households was being reduced by higher prices for food, energy, and other essentials. Participants generally ex- pected higher mortgage interest rates to contribute to further declines in home sales, and a couple of partici- pants noted that housing activity in their Districts had begun to slow noticeably. Against the backdrop of rising borrowing costs and higher gasoline and food prices, a couple of participants commented that consumer senti- ment had dropped notably in June, according to the pre- liminary reading in the Michigan survey. With respect to the business sector, participants ob- served that their contacts generally reported that sales remained strong, although some contacts indicated that sales had begun to slow and that they had become less optimistic about the outlook. In many industries, the ability of firms to meet demand continued to be limited by labor shortages and supply chain bottlenecks. Firms relying on international sources for their inputs were seen as encountering particularly acute supply chain dis- ruptions. Supply constraints, labor shortages, and rising input costs were also reportedly limiting energy and ag- ricultural producers’ ability to take advantage of the higher prices of their products by investing and expand- ing their production capacity. Similarly, a few partici- pants noted that, in other sectors of the economy, their contacts reported that they were postponing investment or construction projects because of rising input and fi- nancing costs. With supply challenges still widespread, contacts continued to assess that supply constraints overall were significant, and many of them judged that these constraints were likely to persist for some time. Participants noted that the demand for labor continued to outstrip available supply across many parts of the economy. They observed that various indicators pointed to a very tight labor market. These indicators included an unemployment rate near a 50-year low, job vacancies at historical highs, and elevated nominal wage Minutes of the Meeting of June 14–15, 2022Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ growth. Additionally, most business contacts had con- tinued to report persistent wage pressures as well as dif- ficulties in hiring and retaining workers. However, some contacts reported that, because of previous wage hikes, hiring and retention had improved and pressure for ad- ditional wage increases appeared to be receding. Employment growth, while moderating somewhat from its pace earlier in the year, had remained robust. Several participants observed that labor force participation re- mained below its pre-pandemic level because of the un- usually large number of retirements during the pandemic and judged that the labor force participation rate was un- likely to move up considerably in the near term. A cou- ple of participants raised the possibility that tight labor markets would spur investment in automation by firms, boosting labor productivity. While labor markets were anticipated to remain tight in the near term, participants expected labor demand and supply to come into better balance over time, helping to ease upward pressure on wages and prices. As in the case of product markets, they anticipated that an appro- priate firming of monetary policy would play a central role in helping address imbalances in the labor market. With the tightness in labor markets anticipated to dimin- ish over time, participants generally expected the unem- ployment rate to increase, as the median projection of the unemployment rate in the June SEP showed a grad- ual rise over the next few years, reaching 4.1 percent in 2024. In light of the very high level of job vacancies, a number of participants judged that the expected moder- ation in labor demand relative to supply might primarily affect vacancies and have a less significant effect on the unemployment rate. Participants noted that inflation remained much too high and observed that it continued to run well above the Committee’s longer-run 2 percent objective, with to- tal PCE prices having risen 6.3 percent over the 12 months ending in April. They also observed that the 12-month change in the CPI in May came in above ex- pectations. Participants were concerned that the May CPI release indicated that inflation pressures had yet to show signs of abating, and a number of them saw it as solidifying the view that inflation would be more persis- tent than they had previously anticipated. They com- mented on the hardship caused by elevated inflation, with low- and moderate-income households especially affected. These households had to spend more of their budgets on essentials such as food, energy, and housing and were less able to bear the rapidly rising costs of these essentials. In that context, some participants noted that their contacts had reported that low- and moderate- income consumers were shifting purchases to lower-cost goods. Participants also stressed that persistently high inflation would impede the achievement of maximum employment on a sustained basis. Participants judged that strong aggregate demand, to- gether with supply constraints that had been larger and longer lasting than expected, continued to contribute to price pressures across a broad array of goods and ser- vices. They noted that the surge in prices of oil and other commodities associated with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine was boosting gasoline and food prices and put- ting additional upward pressure on inflation. Partici- pants commented on the global nature of inflation pres- sures, and a few of them added that many foreign central banks were also firming the stance of monetary policy. Several participants judged that a shift in spending from goods to services was likely to be associated with less upward pressure on prices in the goods sector, but also an intensification of upward pressure on prices in the services sector. Participants had revised up their PCE inflation projections for 2022 in their June SEP submis- sions, largely in response to higher-than-expected infla- tion readings and the slower anticipated resolution of supply constraints. They expected that the appropriate firming of monetary policy and an eventual easing of supply and demand imbalances would bring inflation back down to levels roughly consistent with the Com- mittee’s longer-run objectives by 2024 and keep longer- term inflation expectations well anchored. Participants observed that some measures of inflation expectations had moved up recently, including the staff index of common inflation expectations and the expec- tations of inflation over the next 5 to 10 years provided in the Michigan survey. With respect to market-based measures, however, a few participants noted that me- dium-term measures of inflation compensation fell over the intermeeting period and longer-term measures were unchanged. While measures of longer-term inflation ex- pectations derived from surveys of households, profes- sional forecasters, and market participants were gener- ally judged to be broadly consistent with the Commit- tee’s longer-run 2 percent inflation objective, many par- ticipants raised the concern that longer-run inflation ex- pectations could be beginning to drift up to levels incon- sistent with the 2 percent objective. These participants noted that, if inflation expectations were to become unanchored, it would be more costly to bring inflation back down to the Committee’s objective. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ In their discussion of risks, participants emphasized that they were highly attentive to inflation risks and were closely monitoring developments regarding both infla- tion and inflation expectations. Most agreed that risks to inflation were skewed to the upside and cited several such risks, including those associated with ongoing sup- ply bottlenecks and rising energy and commodity prices. Participants judged that uncertainty about economic growth over the next couple of years was elevated. In that context, a couple of them noted that GDP and gross domestic income had been giving conflicting signals re- cently regarding the pace of economic growth, making it challenging to determine the economy’s underlying mo- mentum. Most participants assessed that the risks to the outlook for economic growth were skewed to the down- side. Downside risks included the possibility that a fur- ther tightening in financial conditions would have a larger negative effect on economic activity than antici- pated as well as the possibilities that the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the COVID-related lockdowns in China would have larger-than-expected effects on economic growth. In their consideration of the appropriate stance of mon- etary policy, participants concurred that the labor market was very tight, inflation was well above the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective, and the near-term inflation outlook had deteriorated since the time of the May meet- ing. Against this backdrop, almost all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 75 basis points at this meeting. One participant favored a 50 basis point increase in the target range at this meeting instead of 75 basis points. All par- ticipants judged that it was appropriate to continue the process of reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal- ance sheet, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that the Committee issued in May. In light of elevated inflation pressures and signs of deterioration in some measures of inflation expectations, all participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the Com- mittee’s 2 percent objective. Participants observed that a return of inflation to the 2 percent objective was nec- essary for creating conditions conducive to a sustainably strong labor market over time. In discussing potential policy actions at upcoming meet- ings, participants continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate to achieve the Committee’s objec- tives. In particular, participants judged that an increase of 50 or 75 basis points would likely be appropriate at the next meeting. Participants concurred that the eco- nomic outlook warranted moving to a restrictive stance of policy, and they recognized the possibility that an even more restrictive stance could be appropriate if ele- vated inflation pressures were to persist. Participants noted that, with the federal funds rate ex- pected to be near or above estimates of its longer-run level later this year, the Committee would then be well positioned to determine the appropriate pace of further policy firming and the extent to which economic devel- opments warranted policy adjustments. They also re- marked that the pace of rate increases and the extent of future policy tightening would depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. Many participants noted that the Committee’s credibility with regard to bringing inflation back to the 2 percent objec- tive, together with previous communications, had been helpful in shifting market expectations of future policy and had already contributed to a notable tightening of financial conditions that would likely help reduce infla- tion pressures by restraining aggregate demand. Partici- pants recognized that ongoing policy firming would be appropriate if economic conditions evolved as expected. At the current juncture, with inflation remaining well above the Committee’s objective, participants remarked that moving to a restrictive stance of policy was required to meet the Committee’s legislative mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. In addition, such a stance would be appropriate from a risk manage- ment perspective because it would put the Committee in a better position to implement more restrictive policy if inflation came in higher than expected. Many partici- pants judged that a significant risk now facing the Com- mittee was that elevated inflation could become en- trenched if the public began to question the resolve of the Committee to adjust the stance of policy as war- ranted. On this matter, participants stressed that appro- priate firming of monetary policy, together with clear and effective communications, would be essential in re- storing price stability. Participants remarked that developments associated with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the COVID-related lockdowns in China, and other factors restraining supply conditions would affect the inflation outlook and that it would likely take some time for inflation to move down to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Participants also judged that maintaining a strong labor market during the process of bringing inflation down to 2 percent would depend on many factors affecting demand and supply. Participants recognized that policy firming could slow Minutes of the Meeting of June 14–15, 2022Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the pace of economic growth for a time, but they saw the return of inflation to 2 percent as critical to achieving maximum employment on a sustained basis. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that overall economic activity appeared to have picked up after edging down in the first quarter. Job gains had been robust in recent months, and the un- employment rate had remained low. Members also agreed that inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. Members concurred that the invasion of Ukraine by Russia was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. Members agreed that the invasion and related events were creating additional upward pressure on in- flation and were weighing on global economic activity. With the effects of the invasion of Ukraine by Russia already materializing, members considered it appropriate to omit from the June statement the sentence conveying the high uncertainty associated with the implications of the invasion for the U.S. economy. Members also agreed that COVID-related lockdowns in China were likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. In light of these developments, members remarked that they remain highly attentive to the upside risks to inflation and would be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolv- ing outlook. In their assessment of the monetary policy stance neces- sary for achieving the Committee’s maximum-employ- ment and price-stability goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1½ to 1¾ percent and anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate. In addition, mem- bers agreed that the Committee would continue reduc- ing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency MBS, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in May. One member preferred to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 1¼ to 1½ percent at this meeting. Members judged that, with high and widespread infla- tion pressures and some measures of longer-term infla- tion expectations moving up somewhat, it would be ap- propriate for the postmeeting statement to note that the Committee was strongly committed to returning infla- tion to its 2 percent objective. As the further firming in the policy stance would likely result in some slowing in economic growth and tempering in labor market condi- tions, members also agreed to remove the previous state- ment language that had indicated an expectation that ap- propriate policy would result in a return of inflation to 2 percent and a strong labor market. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. They also concurred that their assessments would take into account a wide range of in- formation, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international develop- ments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective June 16, 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to:  Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1½ to 1¾ percent.  Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 1.75 percent and with an aggregate opera- tion limit of $500 billion; the aggregate op- eration limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 1.55 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing in the calendar months of June and July that ex- ceeds a cap of $30 billion per month. Re- deem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________  Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in the calendar months of June and July that exceeds a cap of $17.5 billion per month.  Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Overall economic activity appears to have picked up after edging down in the first quarter. Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pres- sures. The invasion of Ukraine by Russia is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. The invasion and related events are creating ad- ditional upward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. In addi- tion, COVID-related lockdowns in China are likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. The Committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1½ to 1¾ percent and anticipates that ongoing increases in the tar- get range will be appropriate. In addition, the Committee will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in May. The Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Lisa D. Cook, Patrick Harker, Philip N. Jefferson, Loretta J. Mester, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: Esther L. George. Patrick Harker voted as an alternate member at this meeting. President George dissented because she judged that a large increase in the target range for the federal funds rate would add to uncertainty about policy concurrent with the beginning of balance sheet runoff in ways that could unsettle households and businesses and could also adversely affect the ability of small banks to meet the credit needs of their communities. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 1.65 percent, effective June 16, 2022. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to approve a ¾ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 1.75 percent, effective June 16, 2022.5 5 In taking this action, the Board approved a request to estab- lish that rate submitted by the Board of Directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. This vote also encom- passed approval by the Board of Governors of the establish- ment of a 1.75 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of June 16, 2022, or the date such Reserve Banks inform the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, other Federal Reserve Banks were informed of the Secretary of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 1.75 percent, effective June 16, 2022, for the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and Minutes of the Meeting of June 14–15, 2022Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 26–27, 2022. The meeting adjourned at 10:45 a.m. on June 15, 2022. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on May 24, 2022, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on May 3–4, 2022. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Dallas, and effective June 17, 2022, for the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and San Francisco.) Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee July 26–27, 2022 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, July 26, 2022, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, July 27, 2022, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michael S. Barr Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Susan M. Collins Lisa D. Cook Esther L. George Philip N. Jefferson Loretta J. Mester Christopher J. Waller Meredith Black, Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Neel Kashkari, and Helen E. Mucciolo,2 Alternate Members of the Committee Patricia Zobel, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Jennifer J. Burns, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board; Sally Davies, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board; Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jon Faust and Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Advisers to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board Burcu Duygan-Bump, Jane E. Ihrig, Kurt F. Lewis, Laura Lipscomb, John W. Schindler, Nitish R. Sinha, Paul R. Wood, and Rebecca Zarutskie, Special Advisers to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively Board Members, Board James A. Clouse, Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Brian M. Doyle, Joseph W. Gruber, David E. Lebow, Ellis W. Tallman, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Lorie K. Logan, Manager, System Open Market Account William F. Bassett, Senior Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Andrew Figura, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board; Christopher J. Gust, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board; Jeffrey D. Walker,3 Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Elected as an Alternate by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, effective July 15, 2022. 3 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Patrick E. McCabe and Norman J. Morin, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board James F. Dolmas, Economic Policy Advisor and Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Nina Boyarchenko, Department Head, Federal Reserve David Arseneau, Assistant Director, Division of Bank of New York Financial Stability, Board; Giovanni Favara and Etienne Gagnon, Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Penelope A. Beattie,4 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board; Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Alyssa Arute,3 Manager, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Sriya L. Anbil,5 Group Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Fabian Winkler, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Peter M. Garavuso, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board David Na and Anthony Sarver, Senior Financial Institution and Policy Analysts, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Brett Takacs, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board Becky C. Bareford, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Kartik B. Athreya, Michael Dotsey, and Michelle M. Neal, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Philadelphia, and New York, respectively James P. Bergin, Spencer Krane, and Giovanni Olivei, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Chicago, and Boston, respectively William D. Dupor, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Andrew Foerster, Senior Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Jonathan Heathcote, Monetary Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Federico Mandelman, Research Economist and Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The deputy manager turned first to a discussion of fi- nancial market developments. Financial markets over the intermeeting period reflected elevated uncertainty about the outlook. Most market participants appeared to view a moderation of inflation and slower, but still positive, economic growth ahead as the most likely sce- nario. However, investors appeared to be increasingly attentive to downside risks to the economy in light of the potential for shocks from abroad and the continued upside surprises to inflation. On net, financial conditions eased modestly over the pe- riod but remained substantially tighter than at the start of the year. Treasury yields fell, reflecting expectations of slower growth as well as a decline in inflation com- pensation. Respondents to the Open Market Desk’s sur- veys of primary dealers and market participants marked down their growth forecasts for 2022 and 2023 and at- tached higher odds than in the June survey to the possi- bility that the U.S. economy could enter a recession in coming quarters. Market participants perceived falling commodity prices—particularly for oil—and the FOMC’s commit- ment to bringing inflation down as pointing to lower in- flation ahead. Market-based measures of near-dated in- flation compensation declined and continued to suggest that inflation would ease in coming quarters. In the Desk surveys, respondents also expected inflation to de- cline substantially in 2023 but assigned meaningful prob- abilities to a wide range of potential outcomes, including scenarios involving continued elevated rates of inflation. Far-forward market-based measures of inflation com- 4 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 5 Attended from the discussion of the economic and financial situation through the end of Wednesday’s session. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ pensation fell over the period. These measures contin- ued to suggest that inflation would return over time to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. In their assessment of the policy outlook, market partic- ipants expected significant policy tightening in coming meetings as the Committee continued to respond to the current elevated level of inflation. Nearly all respond- ents to the Desk survey anticipated a 75 basis point in- crease in the target range at the current meeting, and most expected a 50 basis point increase in September to follow. The market-implied path of the federal funds rate indicated a peak policy rate of around 3.4 percent, significantly lower than at the time of the June meeting. The market-implied path suggested expectations that the policy rate would fall thereafter. Most respondents to the Desk survey expected the federal funds rate to re- main above the survey’s longer-run policy rate of 2.4 percent through the end of 2024, but, on average, re- spondents placed significant probabilities on lower rate outcomes. Regarding developments abroad, central banks in ad- vanced foreign economies (AFEs) had quickened the pace of policy tightening in order to address above-tar- get inflation. Eight advanced-economy central banks raised their policy rates over the period. Along lines sim- ilar to U.S. developments, market-implied policy rates in most AFEs fell at longer horizons and reflected expec- tations that policy rates would reach peak levels by early 2023. In contrast to central banks in other advanced economies, the Bank of Japan confirmed its commit- ment to accommodative policy. In this environment, the exchange value of the dollar appreciated further, surpas- sing its March 2020 peak against advanced-economy currencies. The deputy manager next turned to a discussion of money markets and Desk operations. The 75 basis point increase in the target range at the June meeting passed through fully to the federal funds rate and other over- night rates. Although downward pressure on overnight secured rates had persisted, the pronounced softness ob- served in the past intermeeting period had abated to some degree. The overnight reverse repurchase agree- ment (ON RRP) facility continued to support policy im- plementation, and balances remained elevated. The dep- uty manager anticipated that, in the near term, the evo- lution of take-up at the ON RRP facility would continue to depend on changes in the supply of safe, short-term investments, and the demand for such investments by money market mutual funds (MMMFs). ON RRP bal- ances were expected to decline over time as balance sheet runoff proceeded. The deputy manager noted that this process would involve adjustments across a number of markets and that the staff would continue to monitor developments in money markets closely. Regarding expectations for the evolution of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, market participants expected the Committee to increase the monthly caps on System Open Market Account (SOMA) redemptions beginning in September, as announced in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet issued in May. Treasury coupon principal payments would first fall below the $60 billion cap in September, with the re- mainder of redemptions met with maturities of Treasury bills. Paydowns of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were projected to fall below the higher Septem- ber cap of $35 billion beginning in September. The deputy manager ended with an update on SOMA net income. Staff projections suggested that net income would likely turn negative in coming months. That de- velopment would be reflected in a temporary deferred asset on Reserve Bank balance sheets. Any deferred as- set would not affect the Committee’s ability to imple- ment monetary policy, and the deferred asset would be extinguished over time as net income turned positive again in later years. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the July 26–27 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) had declined over the first half of the year. How- ever, the labor market continued to be very tight, and labor demand remained strong. Consumer price infla- tion—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expendi- tures (PCE)—remained elevated in May, and available information suggested that inflation was still elevated in June. Total nonfarm payroll employment posted a solid gain in June at a pace that was similar to that seen in April and May. The unemployment rate was unchanged in June at 3.6 percent. The unemployment rate for African Americans moved lower in June, while the rate for His- panics was unchanged; both rates were noticeably higher than the national average. The labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio both ticked _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 26–27, 2022Page 3 down in June. The private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Sur- vey, declined further in May but remained at a high level. Nominal wage growth continued to be rapid and broad based, with average hourly earnings having risen 5.1 per- cent over the 12 months ending in June. Real goods exports edged down in May after growing robustly in March and April. Real goods imports con- tinued to step down from the exceptionally strong March readings, driven by declines in imports of con- sumer goods and capital goods. Exports and imports of services continued to be held back by an incomplete re- covery of international travel. The nominal U.S. inter- national trade deficit narrowed for a second consecutive month in May from its record size in March. The avail- able data suggest that net exports contributed positively to GDP growth in the second quarter. Consumer price inflation remained elevated. Total PCE price inflation was 6.3 percent over the 12 months end- ing in May, and core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.7 percent over the same period. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price infla- tion constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 4.0 percent in May, 2.1 percentage points higher than its year-earlier rate of increase. In June, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 9.1 percent, while core CPI inflation was 5.9 percent over the same period. Survey-based measures of short- run inflation expectations remained elevated; by con- trast, some measures of longer-term inflation expecta- tions moved lower in recent weeks. Available indicators suggested that real PCE rose at a modest pace in the second quarter, while business in- vestment, residential investment, and government pur- chases all posted declines. Manufacturing output moved lower in May and June, and forward-looking indicators of manufacturing activity weakened broadly. Foreign economic growth slowed notably in the second quarter, as COVID-19-related lockdowns led to a sharp contraction in China and Russia’s war against Ukraine took a toll on foreign activity, especially in Europe. In- dicators for June showed the Chinese economy re- bounding as the lockdowns were eased. The global economy, however, continued to face headwinds from disruptions to the supply of energy, elevated political un- certainties in Europe, and tighter global monetary and financial conditions. Although most commodity prices moved lower from elevated levels in recent weeks, for- eign consumer price inflation continued to rise through June, mostly reflecting past increases in energy and food prices, but also a continued broadening of price pres- sures to core goods and services. Many foreign central banks tightened monetary policy to address high infla- tion. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, nominal and real Treasury yields declined significantly, reportedly reflecting in- creased investor concerns about downside risks to the growth outlook as well as a decline in inflation compen- sation. Sovereign yields in AFEs declined notably. The market-implied federal funds rate path for the next few meetings rose but moved down noticeably at longer ho- rizons. Broad equity price indexes were higher, on net, while credit spreads widened. Major foreign equity price indexes edged higher, on net, and the exchange value of the dollar continued to appreciate. Amid the decline in Treasury yields, longer-term borrowing costs declined for households and businesses with higher credit ratings, and while credit availability remained generally available, it appeared to tighten for most businesses and some households. Broad equity price indexes were higher over the inter- meeting period, amid heightened volatility. Declines in interest rates likely supported stock prices over the pe- riod, while some positive earnings releases suggested to investors a less pessimistic corporate outlook. One- month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index— the VIX—decreased but remained significantly above its pre-pandemic levels. Yields on corporate bonds de- clined notably across the credit spectrum, but corporate bond spreads ended the period slightly wider. Spreads on municipal bonds widened slightly as yields declined by less than those of comparable-maturity Treasury se- curities. Conditions in short-term funding markets were stable since the previous FOMC meeting, with the June in- crease in the Federal Reserve’s administered rates pass- ing through promptly to overnight money markets. Se- cured overnight rates remained soft relative to the ON RRP offering rate, with the downward pressure on rates attributed to continuing declines in net Treasury bill is- suance, elevated demand for collateral in the form of Treasury securities, and MMMFs maintaining very short portfolio maturities amid uncertainty about the near- term outlook for policy rate increases. Consistent with the downward pressure on repo rates, daily take-up in the ON RRP facility increased. Spreads on lower-rated short-term commercial paper (CP) narrowed modestly, on net. Bank core deposit rates moved up very little in Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ response to the Federal Reserve’s increase in adminis- tered rates following the June FOMC meeting, while MMMFs’ net yields rose, reflecting the increases in short-term rates over recent months. Investors’ concerns about global economic growth in- tensified amid weaker-than-expected data on economic activity and uncertainty about the supply of natural gas from Russia to Europe. Sovereign yields and medium- term inflation compensation measures in major AFEs, most notably in the euro area, moved down, with yields largely reversing the sharp increase that occurred just be- fore the June FOMC meeting. In the euro area, periph- eral sovereign spreads were little changed following the widely anticipated announcement by the European Cen- tral Bank of its Transmission Protection Instrument that could be activated to counter disorderly conditions in euro-area bond markets. Major foreign equity price in- dexes were volatile but generally edged higher, on net, supported by declines in sovereign yields. The dollar ap- preciated somewhat further against most currencies and particularly against the euro as yield differentials between the United States and the euro area widened. Most Latin American currencies depreciated against the dollar, in part reflecting the decline in global commodity prices. In domestic credit markets, longer-term borrowing costs for households and businesses with higher credit ratings declined over the intermeeting period but borrowing costs for lower rated firms were higher, on net. The credit quality of businesses, municipalities, and house- holds remained stable. Credit remained generally avail- able, though credit availability appeared to tighten for most businesses and for some households. Borrowing costs linked to shorter-term interest rates generally increased, largely as a result of expectations of tighter monetary policy. Bank interest rates for both commercial and industrial (C&I) and commercial real es- tate (CRE) loans increased in May and were close to pre- pandemic levels. Yields on institutional leveraged loans and newly issued commercial mortgage-backed securi- ties (CMBS) increased amid financial market volatility and growing concerns about an economic slowdown. Small businesses that borrow on a regular basis faced notably higher borrowing costs in June. Interest rates on most existing credit card accounts and on auto loans continued to trend upward. In contrast to many other borrowing rates, residential mortgage rates fell since the June FOMC meeting, in line with the drop in longer- term yields, but remained near their highest levels since 2010. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained strong with low volumes of defaults on corporate bonds in May and on leveraged loans in June. The volume of rating downgrades on speculative-grade credit in the cor- porate bond market was similar to that of upgrades in June, while for leveraged loans, the volume of down- grades exceeded the volume of upgrades in May and June. The credit quality for C&I and CRE loans on banks’ books remained sound. However, respondents in the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) indicated increased con- cerns about credit quality in the near future as reasons for their expectation of a tightening in lending standards over the second half of 2022. Delinquency rates on CRE loans in CMBS declined in June, delinquency rates on small business loans were little changed, and the credit quality of municipal securities remained strong. The credit quality of households stayed solid. Residential mortgage delinquencies and the share of mortgages in forbearance trended down. Credit card and auto credit delinquency rates rose somewhat over the first quarter but remained subdued by recent historical standards. Business loans at banks expanded at a rapid pace in May and June, despite higher interest rates and a more uncer- tain economic outlook. C&I loans on banks’ books con- tinued to grow robustly, with the July SLOOS citing rea- sons of increased demand by customers to finance in- ventory and accounts receivable. However, issuance of both agency and non-agency CMBS slowed significantly in June. Credit appeared to be available to most small businesses, although the share of small firms reporting that it was difficult to obtain loans increased. Credit in the residential mortgage market remained widely availa- ble for borrowers with higher credit ratings but tight for households with low credit scores. Volumes of home- purchase mortgage originations declined in May and mortgage refinance volumes continued to fall. Con- sumer credit remained broadly available to households in April and May but respondents in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations indicated that it was harder to get credit in recent months. That said, auto loans outstanding continued to grow at a robust pace in April and May but credit card balances moderated somewhat in May and June. The staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, charac- terized the vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as moderate, down from notable in January. Equity and corporate debt prices declined significantly since the last assessment, reflecting concerns over slower _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 26–27, 2022Page 5 growth and lower risk appetite in corporate markets. Declining risk appetite has also led to sharp declines in the price of some digital assets. The staff noted that dig- ital assets tended to be volatile. The staff also high- lighted the financial stability considerations associated with rapid growth in stablecoins, including their vulner- ability to runs and the opacity of many aspects of their operations. Residential real estate prices continued to rise, and the staff noted that although valuations have been elevated, mortgage underwriting standards have been stronger than in previous house-price cycles. CRE prices continued to rise, and valuation pressures ap- peared to be increasing. The staff assessed that households were in a better posi- tion than in the mid-2000s to weather a downturn in house prices, noting that mortgage debt growth has sig- nificantly lagged growth in house prices, leaving house- holds with substantial equity cushions. Moreover, for much of the past decade, most new mortgage debt had been added by borrowers with prime credit scores. In addition, the staff assessed that business leverage was high, but businesses maintained ample cash on hand and their credit quality remained strong. Further, the ability of most firms to service their debt was at a historically high level, as measured by the interest coverage ratio. The staff assessed that leverage in the financial sector remained moderate. Recent declines in bank capital ra- tios were due to higher volatility, interest rate increases, and loan growth, but the recently concluded stress tests suggested that participating banks could absorb losses from a severe recession without breaching regulatory minimums, and some banks were expected to increase their capital ratios later this year. Leverage at hedge funds and life insurance companies remained relatively high. Market liquidity had deteriorated in the oil and equities markets since January, but market functioning continued to be orderly. Yields offered by MMMFs were well above those offered by banks, and the staff noted that this yield differential would attract inflows to MMMFs. Noting the structural vulnerabilities associated with MMMFs, the staff highlighted the need to monitor the size and fragility of this sector and the progress of the Security and Exchange Commission’s recently proposed reforms. The staff noted that open-end bond and loan mutual funds, which are also vulnerable to large-scale in- vestor withdrawals, had experienced outflows as interest rates rose. These outflows had proceeded in an orderly manner. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the July FOMC meeting was noticeably weaker than the June forecast, reflecting the economy’s reduced momentum and current and prospective finan- cial conditions that were expected to provide less sup- port to aggregate demand growth. As a result, while the projected level of real GDP remained above potential this year, the gap was expected to have closed by the sec- ond half of 2023. Similarly, the unemployment rate was projected to start rising in the second half of 2022 and to reach the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at the end of next year. Total PCE price inflation was expected to be 4.8 percent in 2022, and core inflation was expected to be 4.0 per- cent. Core PCE price inflation was expected to step down to 2.6 percent in 2023 and to 2.0 percent in 2024; the projected deceleration in core prices was attributable to the anticipated resolution of supply–demand imbal- ances, a labor market that was expected to become less tight over the projection period, and a projected decline in import price inflation. Total PCE inflation was ex- pected to decline to 2.2 percent in 2023 and to 1.9 per- cent in 2024, reflecting the anticipated slowing in core inflation and a projected rapid deceleration in consumer food and energy prices in coming quarters. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside, noting that supply chain bottlenecks, Russia’s war against Ukraine, weak incoming data on spending, and the tightening in financial conditions since the start of the year supported this assessment. The staff viewed the risks to the inflation projection as skewed to the upside given the persistent upward surprises seen in the infla- tion data, the possibility that inflation expectations would become unanchored as a result of the large in- crease in actual inflation over the past year, and the risk that supply conditions would not improve as much as the baseline projection assumed. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that recent indicators of spending and production had softened. Nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Inflation remained elevated, re- flecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Participants recognized that Russia’s war against Ukraine was causing tremendous human and Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ economic hardship. Participants judged that the war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic ac- tivity. Against this background, participants stated that they were highly attentive to inflation risks. With regard to current economic activity, participants noted that consumer expenditures, housing activity, business investment, and manufacturing production had all decelerated from the robust rates of growth seen in 2021. The labor market, however, remained strong. Participants observed that indicators of spending and production suggested that the second quarter of this year had seen a broad-based softening in economic activity. Many participants remarked that some of the slowing, particularly in the housing sector, reflected the emerging response of aggregate demand to the tightening of finan- cial conditions associated with the ongoing firming of monetary policy. The unwinding of the large-scale sup- port to consumer spending provided by pandemic-re- lated fiscal policy actions, the inflation-induced reduc- tion in real disposable income, and the move down in the demand for some products from the elevated levels seen in earlier stages of the pandemic had also all led to slower growth in households’ expenditures. In addition, a deterioration in the foreign economic outlook and a strong dollar were contributing to a weakening of exter- nal demand. Participants anticipated that U.S. real GDP would expand in the second half of the year, but many expected that growth in economic activity would be at a below-trend pace, as the period ahead would likely see the response of aggregate demand to tighter financial conditions become stronger and more broad based. Par- ticipants noted that a period of below-trend GDP growth would help reduce inflationary pressures and set the stage for the sustained achievement of the Commit- tee’s objectives of maximum employment and price sta- bility. In their discussion of the household sector, participants commented that they were seeing many signs in the data, and hearing reports from business contacts, of slower growth in consumer spending. Although the aggregate balance sheet for the household sector was strong and the unemployment rate was low, consumer sentiment had deteriorated, and households were reportedly be- coming more cautious in their expenditure decisions in light of uncertainty about the economic outlook and the reduction in purchasing power induced by price rises, particularly increases in the prices of essentials such as food, housing, and transportation. Participants also ob- served that housing activity had weakened notably, re- flecting the impact of higher mortgage interest rates and house prices on home affordability. Participants antici- pated that this slowdown in housing activity would con- tinue and also expected higher borrowing costs to lead to a slowing in other interest-sensitive household ex- penditures, such as purchases of durable goods. With respect to the business sector, participants noted that investment spending had likely declined in the sec- ond quarter. In addition, business survey data and infor- mation received from contacts indicated that manufac- turing orders and production had fallen in some Dis- tricts. Heightened uncertainty, concerns about inflation, tighter financial conditions, and a cutback in consumer spending had led firms to downgrade economic pro- spects. Some participants noted that their contacts were reporting that businesses were in the process of reevalu- ating their capital expenditure plans, though a few par- ticipants stated that some contacts had reported a degree of short-term momentum in business activity arising from existing orders and from the implementation of ex- pansion plans made before the tightening of financial conditions. A few participants indicated that some busi- ness contacts had assessed that demand and supply were beginning to come into better balance. Even so, con- tacts in many areas continued to report major supply chain disruptions and anticipated that these were likely to continue while also indicating that there were signs of improvement in supply conditions in some areas. Participants observed that the labor market remained strong, with the unemployment rate very low, job vacan- cies and quits close to historically high levels, and an el- evated rate of nominal wage growth. Many participants also noted, however, that there were some tentative signs of a softening outlook for the labor market: These signs included increases in weekly initial unemployment insurance claims, reductions in quit rates and vacancies, slower growth in payrolls than earlier in the year, and reports of cutbacks in hiring in some sectors. In addi- tion, although nominal wage growth remained strong ac- cording to a wide range of measures, there were some signs of a leveling off or edging down. In some Districts, contacts had suggested that labor demand–supply imbal- ances might be diminishing, with firms being more suc- cessful in hiring and retaining workers and under less pressure to raise wages. Some participants noted that the contribution that increases in labor supply could make to reducing labor market imbalances was likely limited, especially as the scope for labor force participa- tion to pick up was constrained by the ongoing move- ment of the large baby-boom cohort into their retire- ment years, while others highlighted factors holding down participation that could wane in the future, such _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 26–27, 2022Page 7 as continuing pandemic-related concerns. Participants observed that, in part because of tighter financial condi- tions and an associated moderation in the growth of ag- gregate demand, growth in employment would likely slow further in the period ahead. They noted that this development would help bring labor demand and supply into better balance, reducing upward pressures on nom- inal wage growth and aiding the return of inflation to 2 percent. Several participants observed that the mod- eration in labor market conditions might well lag the slowdown in economic activity. Participants remarked that a moderation in labor market conditions would likely involve a decline in the number of job openings as well as a moderate increase in unemployment from the current very low rate. A couple of participants indicated that firms were keen to retain workers—a factor that could limit the increase in layoffs associated with a slow- ing labor market. Participants noted that indicators of spending and pro- duction pointed to less underlying strength in economic activity than was suggested by indicators of labor market activity. With employment growth still strong, the weak- ening in spending data implied unusually large negative readings on labor productivity growth for the year so far. Participants remarked that the strength of the labor mar- ket suggested that economic activity may be stronger than implied by the current GDP data, with several par- ticipants raising the possibility that the discrepancy might ultimately be resolved by GDP being revised up- ward. Several participants also observed, however, that the labor market might not be as tight as some indicators suggested, and they noted that data provided by the pay- roll processor ADP and employment as reported in the household survey both seemed to imply a softer labor market than that suggested by the still-robust growth in payroll employment as reported in the establishment survey. Participants observed that inflation remained unaccept- ably high and was well above the Committee’s longer- run goal of 2 percent. In light of the high CPI reading for June, participants noted that PCE inflation was likely to have increased further in that month. Participants further observed that inflationary pressures were broad based, a pattern reflected in large one-month increases in the trimmed mean CPI and core CPI measures. Par- ticipants remarked that, although recent declines in gas- oline prices would likely help produce lower headline in- flation rates in the short term, declines in the prices of oil and some other commodities could not be relied on as providing a basis for sustained lower inflation, as these prices could quickly rebound. Participants also noted that the high cost of living was an especially great burden on low- and middle-income households. Partic- ipants agreed that there was little evidence to date that inflation pressures were subsiding. They judged that in- flation would respond to monetary policy tightening and the associated moderation in economic activity with a delay and would likely stay uncomfortably high for some time. Participants also observed that in some product categories, the rate of price increase could well pick up further in the short run, with sizable additional increases in residential rental expenses being especially likely. Participants noted that supply bottlenecks were contin- uing to contribute to price pressures. There were, how- ever, some signs of gradual improvement in the supply situation—including improved availability of certain key materials, less upward pressure on input prices, and a de- cline in delivery times. Contacts reported that there were nevertheless substantial continuing challenges. Partici- pants judged that it would take considerable time for supply constraints to be resolved, and a few suggested that full resolution of supply difficulties would take longer than they previously assessed. Several partici- pants stressed that improvements in supply would be helpful but by themselves could not be relied on to re- solve the supply and demand imbalances in the economy sufficiently rapidly. Participants emphasized that a slow- ing in aggregate demand would play an important role in reducing inflation pressures. They expected that the ap- propriate firming of monetary policy and an eventual easing of supply and demand imbalances would bring in- flation back down to levels consistent with the Commit- tee’s longer-run objective and keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. Participants discussed a number of factors likely to be helpful in bringing infla- tion back down to 2 percent. In addition to the Com- mittee’s ongoing policy firming and anchored longer- term inflation expectations, these included competitive pressures restraining price increases, the apparent ab- sence of a wage–price spiral, the tightening of monetary policy abroad, and the impact of the appreciation of the dollar on import prices. However, they continued to view commodity price developments as a potential source of upward pressure on inflation. Participants noted that expectations of inflation were an important influence on the behavior of actual inflation and stressed that moving to an appropriately restrictive stance of policy was essential for avoiding an unanchor- ing of inflation expectations. Such an unanchoring would make achieving the Committee’s statutory objec- tives of maximum employment and price stability much more difficult. In assessing the current state of inflation Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ expectations, participants noted that recent readings on market-based measures of inflation compensation were consistent with longer-term inflation expectations re- maining anchored near 2 percent. They judged that this behavior of longer-term inflation expectations was likely partly due to the actual and expected firming of mone- tary policy and also likely reflected downward revisions to the growth of aggregate demand expected in coming years. In addition, several participants assessed that the Committee’s ongoing monetary policy tightening was helping alleviate concerns among market participants and wage and price setters that elevated inflation would become entrenched. Several participants observed that recent readings on survey measures of inflation expecta- tions were broadly consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective, although a few participants noted that household surveys were indicat- ing increasing divergences in views about the likely longer-run rate of inflation. In their discussion of risks, participants emphasized that they were highly attentive to inflation risks and were closely monitoring developments regarding both infla- tion and inflation expectations. Uncertainty about the medium-term course of inflation remained high, and the balance of inflation risks remained skewed to the upside, with several participants highlighting the possibility of further supply shocks arising from commodity markets. Participants saw the risks to the outlook for real GDP growth as primarily being to the downside. These down- side risks included the possibility that the tightening in financial conditions would have a larger negative effect on economic activity than anticipated, that there would be further pandemic-related economic disruptions, or that geopolitical and global economic developments would lead to additional adverse economic or financial disturbances. Several of the participants who commented on issues re- lated to financial stability noted that, on balance, asset valuations had eased from elevated levels in recent months. High levels of capital and liquidity overall in the banking system, healthy household balance sheets, and the adoption of stronger mortgage underwriting standards following the Global Financial Crisis were also cited among the factors that fostered financial stability in the current environment. Several participants noted that financial market liquidity had been low in some ar- eas but that market functioning had, nonetheless, been orderly. Several participants emphasized the importance of avoiding complacency when assessing financial vul- nerabilities amid ever-changing economic and financial landscapes or the need to look at a broad range of pos- sible outcomes, including scenarios involving elevated inflation and rising interest rates, when assessing finan- cial vulnerabilities and stability. Some participants com- mented on the financial stability challenges posed by dig- ital assets. They noted that these assets, including sta- blecoins, were subject to vulnerabilities—such as runs, fire sales, and excessive leverage—similar to those asso- ciated with more traditional assets. While the recent tur- moil in digital asset markets had not spread to other asset classes, these participants saw digital assets’ rising im- portance and growing interconnectedness with other segments of the financial system as underscoring the need to establish a robust supervisory and regulatory framework for this industry that would appropriately limit potential systemic risks. A few participants men- tioned the need to strengthen the oversight and regula- tion of certain types of nonbank financial institutions. Several participants noted that capital at some of the largest banks had declined in recent quarters. These par- ticipants emphasized that it was important that the larg- est banks have strong capital positions and that appro- priate settings of regulatory and supervisory tools can help deliver that outcome. A couple of these partici- pants highlighted the potential role that usage of the countercyclical capital buffer could play in this context. In their consideration of the appropriate stance of mon- etary policy, participants concurred that the labor market was very tight and that inflation was far above the Com- mittee’s 2 percent inflation objective. Participants noted that recent indicators of spending and production had softened, while, by contrast, job gains had been robust and the unemployment rate had remained low. Against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appro- priate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 75 basis points at this meeting and to continue the pro- cess of reducing the Federal Reserve’s securities hold- ings, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that the Committee issued in May. Participants observed that, following this meeting’s policy rate hike, the nominal federal funds rate would be within the range of their estimates of its longer-run neutral level. Even so, with inflation elevated and expected to remain so over the near term, some par- ticipants emphasized that the real federal funds rate would likely still be below shorter-run neutral levels after this meeting’s policy rate hike. In discussing potential policy actions at upcoming meet- ings, participants continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 26–27, 2022Page 9 would be appropriate to achieve the Committee’s objec- tives. With inflation remaining well above the Commit- tee’s objective, participants judged that moving to a re- strictive stance of policy was required to meet the Com- mittee’s legislative mandate to promote maximum em- ployment and price stability. Participants concurred that the pace of policy rate increases and the extent of future policy tightening would depend on the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and risks to the outlook. Participants judged that, as the stance of monetary policy tightened further, it likely would become appropriate at some point to slow the pace of policy rate increases while assessing the effects of cumulative policy adjustments on economic activity and inflation. Some participants indicated that, once the policy rate had reached a sufficiently restrictive level, it likely would be appropriate to maintain that level for some time to ensure that inflation was firmly on a path back to 2 percent. Participants concurred that, in expeditiously raising the policy rate, the Committee was acting with resolve to lower inflation to 2 percent and anchor inflation expec- tations at levels consistent with that longer-run goal. Participants noted that the Committee’s credibility with regard to bringing inflation back to the 2 percent objec- tive, together with its forceful policy actions and com- munications, had already contributed to a notable tight- ening of financial conditions that would likely help re- duce inflation pressures by restraining aggregate de- mand. Participants pointed to some evidence suggesting that policy actions and communications about the future path of the federal funds rate were starting to affect the economy, most visibly in interest-sensitive sectors. Par- ticipants generally judged that the bulk of the effects on real activity had yet to be felt because of lags associated with the transmission of monetary policy, and that while a moderation in economic growth should support a re- turn of inflation to 2 percent, the effects of policy firm- ing on consumer prices were not yet apparent in the data. A number of participants posited that some of the effects of policy actions and communications were showing up more rapidly than had historically been the case, because the expeditious removal of policy accom- modation and supporting communications already had led to a significant tightening of financial conditions. In light of elevated inflation and the upside risks to the outlook for inflation, participants remarked that moving to a restrictive stance of the policy rate in the near term would also be appropriate from a risk-management per- spective because it would better position the Committee to raise the policy rate further, to appropriately restric- tive levels, if inflation were to run higher than expected. Participants judged that a significant risk facing the Committee was that elevated inflation could become en- trenched if the public began to question the Committee’s resolve to adjust the stance of policy sufficiently. If this risk materialized, it would complicate the task of return- ing inflation to 2 percent and could raise substantially the economic costs of doing so. Many participants re- marked that, in view of the constantly changing nature of the economic environment and the existence of long and variable lags in monetary policy’s effect on the econ- omy, there was also a risk that the Committee could tighten the stance of policy by more than necessary to restore price stability. These participants highlighted this risk as underscoring the importance of the Commit- tee’s data-dependent approach to judging the pace and magnitude of policy firming over coming quarters. Participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to re- turning inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Participants agreed that a return of inflation to the 2 per- cent objective was necessary for sustaining a strong labor market. Participants remarked that it would likely take some time for inflation to move down to the Commit- tee’s objective. Participants added that the course of in- flation would be influenced by various nonmonetary fac- tors, including developments associated with Russia’s war against Ukraine and with supply chain disruptions. Participants recognized that policy firming could slow the pace of economic growth, but they saw the return of inflation to 2 percent as critical to achieving maximum employment on a sustained basis. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators of spending and production had softened. Members also concurred that, nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months and the unemployment rate had remained low. Mem- bers agreed that inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pres- sures. In describing the sources of elevated inflation, members judged it pertinent to add a reference to higher food prices to the statement because of the notable rise in these prices and the importance of food items in households’ budgets. Members concurred that Russia’s war against Ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. They also agreed that the war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ were weighing on global economic activity. Members remarked that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. Amid evidence that COVID-related lockdowns in China had generally been lifted and had affected supply chains only modestly, members generally considered it appropriate to omit from the July statement the sentence that appeared in the June statement indicating that these lockdowns were likely to exacerbate supply chain disrup- tions. In their assessment of the monetary policy stance neces- sary for achieving the Committee’s maximum-employ- ment and price-stability goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2¼ to 2½ percent and anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate. In addition, mem- bers agreed that the Committee would continue reduc- ing the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency MBS, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Bal- ance Sheet that were issued in May. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. They also concurred that their assessments would take into account a wide range of in- formation, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international develop- ments. Members affirmed that the Committee was strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective July 28, 2022, the Federal Open Mar- ket Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2¼ to 2½ percent. • Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 2.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate opera- tion limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 2.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-coun- terparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing in the calendar months of July and August that ex- ceeds a cap of $30 billion per month. Re- deem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • Starting in the calendar month of Septem- ber, roll over at auction the amount of prin- cipal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are the monthly cap. than less • Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in the calendar months of July and August that exceeds a cap of $17.5 billion per month. • Starting in the calendar month of Septem- ber, reinvest into agency MBS the amount of principal payments from the Federal Re- serve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 26–27, 2022Page 11 The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Recent indicators of spending and production have softened. Nonetheless, job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate has remained low. Inflation re- mains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Russia’s war against Ukraine is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship. The war and related events are creating additional up- ward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. The Committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2¼ to 2½ percent and anticipates that ongoing increases in the tar- get range will be appropriate. In addition, the Committee will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in May. The Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michael S. Barr, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Susan M. Collins, Lisa D. Cook, Esther L. George, Philip N. Jefferson, Loretta J. Mester, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 2.4 per- cent, effective July 28, 2022. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to ap- prove a ¾ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 2.5 percent, effective July 28, 2022.6 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, September 20– 21, 2022. The meeting adjourned at 10:35 a.m. on July 27, 2022. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on July 5, 2022, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on June 14–15, 2022. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 6 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleve- land, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco. This vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Gover- nors of the establishment of a 2.5 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of July 28, 2022, or the date such Reserve Banks inform the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Minne- apolis, and Kansas City were informed of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 2.5 percent, effective July 28, 2022.) Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee September 20–21, 2022 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, September 20, 2022, at 1:00 p.m. and con- tinued on Wednesday, September 21, 2022, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michael S. Barr Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Susan M. Collins Lisa D. Cook Esther L. George Philip N. Jefferson Loretta J. Mester Christopher J. Waller Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Neel Kashkari, Lorie K. Logan, and Helen E. Mucciolo, Alternate Members of the Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board David Altig, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Kartik B. Athreya, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board James P. Bergin, Deputy General Counsel, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Camille Bryan, Senior Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Michele Cavallo, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Stephanie E. Curcuru, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board Marnie Gillis DeBoer, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Sarah Devany, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Michael Dotsey, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Burcu Duygan-Bump, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Matthew J. Eichner,4 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Shaghil Ahmed, Joseph W. Gruber, Carlos Garriga, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Patricia Zobel,2 Manager pro tem, System Open Market Account Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board Andrew Figura, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 In the absence of the manager, the Committee’s Rules of Organization provide that the deputy manager acts as manager pro tem. 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 4 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Michelle M. Neal, Head of Markets, Federal Reserve Research and Statistics, Board Bank of New York Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Division of Board Members, Board Affairs, Board Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision Giovanni Olivei, Senior Vice President, Federal and Regulation, Board Reserve Bank of Boston Luca Guerrieri, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Anna Paulson, Executive Vice President, Federal Financial Stability, Board Reserve Bank of Chicago Diana Hancock, Senior Associate Director, Division of Karen M. Pence,5 Deputy Associate Director, Division Research and Statistics, Board of Research and Statistics, Board Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Andrea Raffo, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Monetary Affairs, Board Bank of Minneapolis Matteo Iacoviello, Senior Associate Director, Division Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of of International Finance, Board Board Members, Board Jane E. Ihrig, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research Board Members, Board and Statistics, Board Callum Jones, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Achilles Sangster II, Senior Information Manager, Affairs, Board Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Edward S. Knotek II, Senior Vice President, Federal John W. Schindler, Special Adviser to the Board, Reserve Bank of Cleveland Division of Board Members, Board Sylvain Leduc, Executive Vice President, Federal Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Vice President, Reserve Bank of San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Seth Searls,4 Associate Director, Federal Reserve Bank Stability, Board of New York Paul Lengermann, Assistant Director, Division of Nitish R. Sinha, Special Adviser to the Board, Division Research and Statistics, Board of Board Members, Board Kurt F. Lewis, Special Adviser to the Board, Division John J. Stevens, Senior Associate Director, Division of of Board Members, Board Research and Statistics, Board Dan Li, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, Senior Adviser, Division of Affairs, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Laura Lipscomb, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board David López-Salido, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jonathan P. McCarthy, Economic Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Jeffrey D. Walker,4 Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Min Wei, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Paul R. Wood, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Nathaniel Wuerffel, Head of Domestic Markets, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 5 Attended from the discussion of the economic and financial situation through the end of Wednesday’s session. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Rebecca Zarutskie, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Andrei Zlate, Group Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager pro tem turned first to a discussion of fi- nancial market developments over the intermeeting pe- riod. U.S. financial conditions tightened over the period, largely reflecting an upward revision in investors’ out- look for the path of the policy rate. Treasury yields climbed substantially, with most of the upward move re- flected in real yields. Equity prices initially rose amid second-quarter earnings reports that were better than feared but later retraced those gains in response to the shifting policy outlook. Regarding international devel- opments, yields in most advanced foreign economies (AFEs) also rose sharply as a number of other central banks lifted policy rates and indicated in their communi- cations that they would likely continue to tighten mone- tary policy in order to address inflation pressures. The exchange value of the dollar appreciated notably, reach- ing multidecade highs in real terms, as market partici- pants perceived mounting economic challenges abroad. The market-implied path of the federal funds rate shifted sharply higher after market participants interpreted Fed- eral Reserve communications—particularly those pro- vided at the Jackson Hole symposium—along with in- coming data, as indicating a more restrictive path of pol- icy than previously expected. Policy-sensitive rates sug- gested that a 75 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate was widely expected to be de- cided on at the Committee’s September meeting, with some chance of a 100 basis point move. In addition, the market-implied path suggested reasonable odds of addi- tional 75 basis point and 50 basis point rate increases at the November and December meetings, respectively. Market participants generally anticipated a further slow- ing in the pace of rate increases after December, with the peak policy rate being reached in the first half of 2023. Beyond that period, the market-implied path of the fed- eral funds rate sloped downward, likely reflecting down- side risks to the policy rate path. The median respond- ent to the Open Market Desk surveys expected the pol- icy rate path to remain flat through 2023 after the peak rate was reached. On average, Desk survey respondents assigned an almost 30 percent probability to a decline in real gross domestic product (GDP) over 2022, nearly double the probability assigned in the July survey. The manager pro tem turned next to a discussion of pol- icy implementation. Balance sheet runoff had continued to proceed smoothly over the intermeeting period. With caps on redemptions of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) doubling in Septem- ber, the pace of balance sheet runoff was set to increase over coming months. The markets for Treasury securi- ties and agency MBS continued to function in an orderly manner, though liquidity conditions in both markets re- mained low, reflecting elevated interest rate uncertainty. In money markets, the 75 basis point increase in the tar- get range at the July meeting passed through fully to overnight rates. Amid strong demand for short-term in- vestments, take-up at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility was relatively steady at el- evated levels. The staff continued to anticipate that ON RRP take-up would decline in coming quarters from its currently ele- vated levels as money market participants responded to shifting conditions. Issuance of short-term securities was likely to increase in coming periods, and, as more clarity emerged in the economic and policy outlook, de- mand for short-term assets could moderate. Both of these developments would ease downward pressure on yields on safe short-term investments. The gradual re- duction in ON RRP balances could also be facilitated by rising competition among banks in seeking deposits. The manager pro tem indicated that the staff would con- tinue to monitor money market developments closely in order to assess whether any frictions were emerging in this process. The manager pro tem concluded with an update on op- erational matters. As expected, Federal Reserve net in- come turned negative in September. The staff expected that the size of the associated deferred asset would in- crease over time until net income turned positive, likely in a few years. The Desk planned to begin aggregation of those agency MBS held in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) that are not eligible to be commingled into Uniform MBS and, specifically, the Freddie Mac MBS that were issued before June 2019 and have a 45-day payment delay; decisions about any additional ag- gregations would be made at a later date. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Minutes of the Meeting of September 20–21, 2022Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the Septem- ber 20–21 meeting suggested that U.S. real GDP was in- creasing at a modest pace in the third quarter after hav- ing declined over the first half of the year. Labor de- mand remained strong, and the labor market continued to be very tight. Recent monthly readings indicated that consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal con- sumption expenditures (PCE)—remained elevated. Total nonfarm payroll employment posted robust gains in July and August at an average pace that was only slightly below what was seen over the first half of the year. The unemployment rate edged up, on net, from 3.6 percent in June to 3.7 percent in August. The unem- ployment rate for African Americans increased over this period, while the rate for Hispanics moved up slightly on net; both rates were noticeably higher than the national average. The labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio both rose, on net, from June to August. The private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Sur- vey, moved slightly lower from May to July but remained at a high level. Nominal wage growth continued to be rapid and broad based: Average hourly earnings rose 5.2 percent over the 12 months ending in August, while the employment cost index of hourly compensation in the private sector, which also includes benefit costs, rose 5.5 percent over the 12 months ending in June, 2.4 per- centage points faster than the year-earlier pace. Consumer price inflation remained elevated. Total PCE price inflation was 6.3 percent over the 12 months end- ing in July, and core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.6 percent over the same period. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price infla- tion constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 4.4 percent in July. In August, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 8.3 percent, while core CPI inflation was 6.3 percent over the same period. Survey-based measures of short-run inflation expecta- tions declined in recent weeks, while measures of longer- term inflation expectations remained roughly stable or moved lower. Available spending indicators, including the August re- tail sales report, suggested that real PCE was on track to post a modest gain in the third quarter. However, the latest housing market data pointed to another sharp con- traction in residential investment in the third quarter, and business fixed investment appeared to be rising at a tepid pace. Real goods exports stepped up in June and then rose fur- ther in July, led by increases in exports of industrial sup- plies. By contrast, real goods imports stepped down in June and then fell sharply in July, driven by a large de- cline in consumer goods imports. Exports and imports of services continued to be held back by an incomplete recovery of international travel. The nominal U.S. inter- national trade deficit continued to narrow in June and July. Altogether, net exports contributed positively to GDP growth in the second quarter and appeared on track to make another positive contribution in the third quarter. Data pointed to weak foreign growth in recent months, weighed down by the global reverberations from Rus- sia’s war against Ukraine and a loss of momentum in the Chinese economy. In Europe, further disruptions to the supply of energy exacerbated declines in real disposable incomes and in consumer and business confidence, re- straining economic activity. In China, recent indicators suggest only a partial rebound from the effects of earlier severe COVID-19-related lockdowns as well as increas- ing concerns about the property sector. Weaker growth in China and the broader global economy also weighed on export-oriented emerging market economies in Asia. Consumer price inflation rose further in August in many foreign economies, reflecting past increases in energy and food prices, but also a continued broadening of in- flationary pressure to core prices. With inflation persis- tently high, many central banks continued to tighten monetary policy. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, U.S. Treasury yields and the market-implied federal funds rate path moved higher. Broad domestic equity price indexes decreased slightly, on balance, but market volatility remained ele- vated. Credit remained widely available to most types of borrowers, but increases in borrowing costs appeared to damp the demand for credit in some markets in recent months. Measures of current loan performance for businesses and most households remained generally sta- ble. However, more recently, expectations of future credit quality for businesses deteriorated slightly, and de- linquency rates rose for some types of credit owed by households with low credit scores. The expected path of the federal funds rate—implied by a straight read of financial market quotes—rose in the period since the July FOMC meeting, largely reflecting Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ more-restrictive-than-expected monetary policy com- munications amid stronger-than-expected economic data and ongoing concerns about high inflation. On net, nominal Treasury yields increased significantly across the maturity spectrum. The increases in nominal Treas- ury yields were primarily accounted for by rising real yields, while inflation compensation measures declined substantially at short horizons and remained relatively little changed at medium- and longer-term horizons. Broad equity price indexes decreased slightly, on net, as substantial early gains arising from investors’ improved perceptions about the inflation outlook and better-than- feared second-quarter earnings were more than offset by later losses arising from expectations that the Committee would follow a more restrictive policy than previously expected. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—increased somewhat, on net, and remained elevated by historical norms, partly reflecting investor uncertainty and risks associated with higher in- flation and the expected move to a restrictive policy stance. Corporate bond spreads narrowed slightly, on net, and remained roughly at the midpoints of their his- torical distributions. Reflecting increases in both policy rates and corporate bond spreads, yields on corporate bonds rose significantly since the start of the year. Mu- nicipal bond spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury yields widened a touch. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period, with the July increase in the Federal Reserve’s administered interest rates pass- ing through quickly to other money market rates. Al- though secured overnight rates firmed slightly later in the intermeeting period, they remained soft relative to the ON RRP offering rate—a configuration that market participants attributed to relatively low Treasury bill sup- ply combined with strong investor demand for short- dated instruments amid uncertainty about the future path of the policy rate. Consistent with continued soft- ness in repurchase agreement rates, daily take-up in the ON RRP facility remained elevated. Spreads on lower- rated short-term commercial paper changed little on net. Bank deposit rates continued to increase modestly in August, following a lagged response to increases in the federal funds rate, while money market mutual funds’ net yields rose along with the increases in short-term rates. Sovereign yields in most AFEs rose notably over the in- termeeting period as major central banks raised their policy rates and communicated a tighter stance of future policy in the face of persistent inflationary pressures. Yields on Japanese government securities, however, ended the period little changed, as the Bank of Japan re- affirmed its accommodative monetary policy stance. Measures of foreign inflation compensation were vola- tile amid large swings in European natural gas prices but increased moderately on net. The U.S. dollar appreci- ated further against most major currencies, reaching multi-decade highs against the euro, the British pound, and the Japanese yen. The dollar’s strength largely re- flected increasing investor concerns about the global growth outlook as well as widening interest rate differ- entials between the United States and Japan. Growth concerns also weighed on foreign equity prices, which declined moderately. Outflows from funds dedicated to emerging markets continued at a modest pace, and credit spreads in emerging market economies narrowed some- what on net. In domestic credit markets, borrowing costs continued to rise over the intermeeting period. Yields on both cor- porate bonds and institutional leveraged loans increased. Bank interest rates for commercial and industrial (C&I) and commercial real estate (CRE) loans also increased. Among small businesses that borrow on a regular basis, the share of firms facing higher borrowing costs contin- ued to climb through August. Municipal bond yields in- creased across ratings categories. Borrowing costs for residential mortgage loans increased and reached their highest levels since 2008. Interest rates on most credit card accounts continued to move higher, in line with the rise in the federal funds rate, and auto loan interest rates rose steadily through August. Credit remained generally available to businesses and households, but high borrowing costs appeared to re- duce the demand for credit, resulting in lower financing volumes in some markets. Issuance of nonfinancial cor- porate bonds slowed further in July from the weak levels seen in the second quarter but rebounded somewhat in August and so far in September. Gross institutional lev- eraged loan issuance increased modestly in July from subdued levels but continued to be weak in August. Eq- uity issuance remained depressed, while issuance of mu- nicipal bonds was sluggish over the summer and so far in September. According to the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Sur- vey on Bank Lending Practices, banks tightened credit standards on C&I lending for the first time in two years, but C&I loans on banks’ balance sheets expanded at a strong pace in July and August, reflecting strong demand from nonfinancial businesses. CRE loans on banks’ bal- Minutes of the Meeting of September 20–21, 2022Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ ance sheets also continued to grow robustly, but issu- ance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) slowed in July from its strong pace earlier in the year. Credit availability to small businesses appeared to be tightening somewhat. The share of small firms reporting that it was more difficult to obtain loans continued its upward trend in August but remained lower than its his- torical average. Credit in the residential mortgage market remained avail- able for high-credit-score borrowers. Credit availability for low-credit-score borrowers continued to ease through July but remained modestly tight—close to pre- pandemic averages. However, the volumes of both home-purchase and refinance mortgage originations plunged in July amid rising mortgage rates. Consumer credit remained available to most households in June and July, but about half of the respondents in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Ex- pectations indicated that it was harder to obtain credit than it was a year earlier and that they expected it to be- come even harder over the next year. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained generally strong, with low default rates for both corpo- rate bonds and leveraged loans. The volume of rating upgrades in the corporate bond market outpaced that of downgrades in July and August, but, so far in September, these relative volumes reversed. The volume of rating downgrades in the leveraged loan market continued to exceed that of upgrades. Credit quality for C&I and CRE loans on banks’ balance sheets also remained sound, as delinquency rates remained at low levels through June. However, banks increased loan loss pro- visions somewhat in the second quarter. Delinquency rates on CRE loans securitized into CMBS remained un- changed in July, delinquency rates on small business loans stayed quite low after edging up, and the credit quality of municipal securities remained strong. Household credit quality stayed broadly solid but con- tinued to worsen for some types of credit owed by bor- rowers with low credit scores. Mortgage delinquencies trended down in recent months, and the share of mort- gages in foreclosure remained low in July. By contrast, credit card and auto credit delinquency rates rose over the second quarter, particularly among subprime bor- rowers, with subprime auto loan delinquency rates re- bounding notably to slightly above their historical aver- ages. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the September FOMC meeting was slightly weaker than the July forecast. However, the staff’s esti- mate of potential output in recent history was revised down significantly in response to continued disappoint- ing productivity growth and the sluggish gains in labor force participation seen so far this year; moreover, this lower trajectory for potential output was expected to persist throughout the forecast period. As a result, the staff’s estimate of the output gap was revised up consid- erably this year, and while the staff projection still had the output gap closing in coming years, the level of out- put was expected to be slightly above potential at the end of 2025. Likewise, the unemployment rate was expected to rise more slowly than in the July projection and to be slightly below the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at the end of 2025. On a 12-month change basis, total PCE price inflation was expected to be 5.1 percent in 2022, and core infla- tion was expected to be 4.3 percent. Although the staff continued to project that core inflation would step down over the next two years—reflecting the anticipated reso- lution of supply–demand imbalances and a labor market that was expected to become less tight—core inflation was revised up in each year of the projection. In 2025, core inflation was expected to be 2.1 percent. Total PCE price inflation was expected to decline to 2.6 per- cent in 2023 as core inflation slowed and energy prices declined. Total PCE inflation was expected to move down further in 2024, to 2 percent, and to remain at 2 percent in 2025. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside. In addition to Russia’s war in Ukraine, weakening activ- ity abroad, and ongoing supply chain bottlenecks, the possibility that a persistent reduction in inflation could require a greater-than-assumed amount of tightening in financial conditions was viewed by the staff as a salient downside risk to their forecast for real activity. The staff viewed the risks to the inflation projection as skewed to the upside on the grounds that supply conditions might not improve as much as expected and energy prices might rise sharply again. The staff also pointed to the possibility that wage increases could put a greater-than- expected amount of upward pressure on price inflation and the possibility that inflation expectations could be- come unanchored given the large rise in inflation seen over the past year as additional upside risks to the infla- tion forecast. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2022 through 2025 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of ap- propriate monetary policy, including the path of the fed- eral funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, un- der appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Eco- nomic Projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that recent indicators had pointed to modest growth in spending and production. Job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate had remained low. Inflation remained ele- vated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Participants recognized that Russia’s war against Ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. Participants judged that the war and related events were creating additional up- ward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. Against this background, participants remained highly attentive to inflation risks. With regard to the economic outlook, participants noted that recent data pointed to modest growth in economic activity over the second half of this year. Participants observed that recent indicators of consumer spending and business investment suggested modest increases in those spending categories but noted that activity in in- terest-sensitive sectors weakened appreciably. Partici- pants revised down their projections of real GDP growth for this year from their projections in June. Sev- eral participants noted that the continued strength in the labor market, as well as the data on gross domestic in- come, raised the possibility that the current GDP data could understate the strength in economic activity this year. Participants generally anticipated that the U.S. economy would grow at a below-trend pace in this and the coming few years, with the labor market becoming less tight, as monetary policy assumed a restrictive stance and global headwinds persisted. Participants noted that a period of below-trend real GDP growth would help reduce inflationary pressures and set the stage for the sustained achievement of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability. In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that consumer spending grew moderately, reflect- ing strength in the labor market, the elevated level of household savings accumulated during the pandemic, and a strong aggregate household-sector balance sheet. Several participants noted that spending appeared to have held up relatively well, especially among higher-in- come households. These participants also noted that the composition of spending by low-to-moderate-income households—who were affected to a greater degree by high food, energy, and shelter prices—was changing, with discretionary expenditures being cut and purchases shifting to lower-cost options. Participants observed that the notable slowdown in residential investment and other interest-sensitive spending had continued, reflect- ing the effect of the Committee’s monetary policy ac- tions and tighter financial conditions. With regard to the business sector, participants observed that growth in investment spending appeared modest. Several participants mentioned that manufacturing activ- ity had slowed. A couple of participants noted that busi- nesses were constrained in undertaking new capital pro- jects, as they faced higher financing costs, persistent challenges associated with supply bottlenecks, and hiring difficulties resulting from the continued tightness of the labor market. Participants discussed how they perceived challenging supply conditions to be evolving. Many participants re- marked that their business contacts were reporting signs of relief in supply bottlenecks, such as declines in ship- ping costs and delivery times and rising inventories, while several participants saw little improvement in the supply situation. Participants saw supply bottlenecks as likely continuing for a while longer, and a couple com- mented that constraints on production were increasingly taking the form of labor shortages rather than parts shortages. Participants observed that the labor market had re- mained very tight, as evidenced by a historically low un- employment rate, elevated job vacancies and quit rates, a low pace of layoffs, robust employment gains, and high nominal wage growth. A few participants remarked that employers facing particularly acute labor shortages were those associated with professional occupations, service industries, skilled trades, and smaller firms. Some par- ticipants noted a number of developments consistent with the labor market moving toward better balance, in- cluding a lower rate of job turnover, a moderation in em- ployment growth, and an increase in the labor force par- ticipation rate for prime-age workers. However, several Minutes of the Meeting of September 20–21, 2022Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ participants assessed that the scope for further improve- ment in labor force participation was likely limited, es- pecially in view of the sizable contribution that retire- ments had made to the previous decline in the participa- tion rate. Participants anticipated that the supply and demand im- balances in the labor market would gradually diminish and the unemployment rate would likely rise somewhat, importantly reflecting the effects of tighter monetary policy. Participants judged that a softening in the labor market would be needed to ease upward pressures on wages and prices. Participants expected that the transi- tion toward a softer labor market would be accompanied by an increase in the unemployment rate. Several com- mented that they considered it likely that the transition would occur primarily through reduced job vacancies and slower job creation. A couple of participants re- marked that, in light of challenges in hiring, businesses might be less willing to reduce their staffing levels in the event of a weakening in general economic activity. A few participants particularly stressed the high uncer- tainty associated with the expected future path of the un- employment rate and commented that the unemploy- ment rate could rise by considerably more than in the staff forecast. Participants observed that inflation remained unaccept- ably high and well above the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. Participants commented that recent inflation data generally had come in above expectations and that, correspondingly, inflation was declining more slowly than they had previously been anticipating. Price pressures had remained elevated and had persisted across a broad array of product categories. Energy prices had declined in recent months but remained con- siderably higher than in 2021, and upside risks to energy prices remained. Several participants noted the contin- ued elevated rates of increase in core goods prices. These participants considered this development as po- tentially indicating that the shift of household spending from goods to services might be having a smaller effect on goods prices than they expected or that the supply bottlenecks and labor shortages were taking longer to be resolved. Participants commented that they expected in- flation pressures to persist in the near term. Numerous contributing factors were cited as supporting this view, including labor market tightness and the resulting up- ward pressure on nominal wages, continuing supply chain disruptions, and the persistent nature of increases in services prices, particularly shelter prices. With respect to the medium term, participants judged that inflation pressures would gradually recede in com- ing years. Various factors were cited as likely to contrib- ute to this outcome, including the Committee’s tighten- ing of its policy stance, a gradual easing of supply and demand imbalances in labor and product markets, and the likelihood that weaker consumer demand would re- sult in a reduction of business profit margins from their current elevated levels. A few participants reported that business contacts in certain retail sectors—such as used cars and apparel—were planning to cut prices in order to help reduce their inventories. Several participants commented that while households across the income distribution were burdened by elevated inflation, those at the lower end of the income distribution were partic- ularly harmed, as a larger share of their income was spent on housing and other necessities. In assessing inflation expectations, participants noted that longer-term expectations appeared to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures obtained from financial markets. Participants remarked that the Committee’s affirmation of its strong commitment to its price-stability objective, together with its forceful policy actions, had likely helped keep longer- run inflation expectations anchored. Some stressed that a more prolonged period of elevated inflation would in- crease the risk of inflation expectations becoming unan- chored, making it much more costly to bring inflation down. A few participants discussed the increased dis- persion of longer-term inflation expectations across re- spondents in various surveys, with an increase in the number of respondents reporting relatively low expecta- tions of future inflation acknowledged as a key driver of the increased dispersion but with a couple of participants citing higher inflation expectations among some survey respondents as a cause for concern and a reason not to be complacent about longer-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. Participants agreed that the uncertainty associated with their economic outlooks was high and that risks to their inflation outlook were weighted to the upside. Some participants noted rising labor tensions, a new round of global energy price increases, further disruptions in sup- ply chains, and a larger-than-expected pass-through of wage increases into price increases as potential shocks that, if they materialized, could compound an already challenging inflation problem. A number of participants commented that a wage–price spiral had not yet devel- oped but cited its possible emergence as a risk. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Participants broadly judged the risks to real GDP growth to be weighted to the downside, with various global headwinds most prominently cited as contributing fac- tors. These global headwinds included heightened risk of recession in Europe, a slowdown in economic activity occurring in China, and the ongoing global economic implications of Russia’s war against Ukraine. Several participants noted that the monetary policy tightening under way in many other economies would affect global financial markets and foreign real GDP growth, with the potential for spillovers to the U.S. economy. In their consideration of the appropriate stance of mon- etary policy, participants concurred that the labor market was very tight and that inflation was far above the Com- mittee’s 2 percent inflation objective. Participants ob- served that recent indicators of production and spending had pointed to modest growth, while job gains had been robust and the unemployment rate had remained low. Against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 75 basis points at this meeting and to continue the process of reducing the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that the Commit- tee issued in May. Policymakers observed that the rate hike at this meeting was another step toward making the Committee’s monetary policy stance sufficiently restric- tive to help ease supply and demand imbalances and to bring inflation back to 2 percent. Participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective, with many stressing the importance of staying on this course even as the la- bor market slowed. In discussing potential policy actions at upcoming meet- ings, participants continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate to achieve the Committee’s objec- tives. Participants judged that the Committee needed to move to, and then maintain, a more restrictive policy stance in order to meet the Committee’s legislative man- date to promote maximum employment and price stabil- ity. Many participants noted that, with inflation well above the Committee’s 2 percent objective and showing little sign so far of abating, and with supply and demand imbalances in the economy continuing, they had raised their assessment of the path of the federal funds rate that would likely be needed to achieve the Committee’s goals. Participants judged that the pace and extent of policy rate increases would continue to depend on the implica- tions of incoming information for the outlook for eco- nomic activity and inflation and on risks to the outlook. Several participants noted that, particularly in the current highly uncertain global economic and financial environ- ment, it would be important to calibrate the pace of fur- ther policy tightening with the aim of mitigating the risk of significant adverse effects on the economic outlook. Participants observed that, as the stance of monetary policy tightened further, it would become appropriate at some point to slow the pace of policy rate increases while assessing the effects of cumulative policy adjust- ments on economic activity and inflation. Many partici- pants indicated that, once the policy rate had reached a sufficiently restrictive level, it likely would be appropri- ate to maintain that level for some time until there was compelling evidence that inflation was on course to re- turn to the 2 percent objective. Participants noted that, in keeping with the Committee’s Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, balance sheet runoff had moved up to its maximum planned pace in September and would continue at that pace. They further observed that a significant reduction in the Committee’s holdings of securities was in progress and that this process was contributing to the move to a re- strictive policy stance. A couple of participants re- marked that, after the process of balance sheet reduction was well under way, it would be appropriate for the Committee to consider sales of agency MBS in order to enable suitable progress toward a longer-run SOMA portfolio composed primarily of Treasury securities. In their assessment of the effects of policy actions and communications to date, participants concurred that the Committee’s actions to raise expeditiously the target range for the federal funds rate demonstrated its resolve to lower inflation to 2 percent and to keep inflation ex- pectations anchored at levels consistent with that longer- run goal. Participants noted that the Committee’s com- mitment to restoring price stability, together with its pur- poseful policy actions and communications, had con- tributed to a notable tightening of financial conditions over the past year that would likely help reduce inflation pressures by restraining aggregate demand. Participants observed that this tightening had led to substantial in- creases in real interest rates across the maturity spec- trum. Most participants remarked that, although some interest-sensitive categories of spending—such as hous- ing and business fixed investment—had already started to respond to the tightening of financial conditions, a sizable portion of economic activity had yet to display much response. They noted also that inflation had not yet responded appreciably to policy tightening and that a significant reduction in inflation would likely lag that Minutes of the Meeting of September 20–21, 2022Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ of aggregate demand. Participants observed that a pe- riod of real GDP growth below its trend rate, very likely accompanied by some softening in labor market condi- tions, was required. They agreed that, by moving its pol- icy purposefully toward an appropriately restrictive stance, the Committee would help ensure that elevated inflation did not become entrenched and that inflation expectations did not become unanchored. These policy moves would therefore prevent the far greater economic pain associated with entrenched high inflation, including the even tighter policy and more severe restraint on eco- nomic activity that would then be needed to restore price stability. In light of the broad-based and unacceptably high level of inflation, the intermeeting news of higher-than- expected inflation, and upside risks to the inflation out- look, participants remarked that purposefully moving to a restrictive policy stance in the near term was consistent with risk-management considerations. Many partici- pants emphasized that the cost of taking too little action to bring down inflation likely outweighed the cost of tak- ing too much action. Several participants underlined the need to maintain a restrictive stance for as long as nec- essary, with a couple of these participants stressing that historical experience demonstrated the danger of prem- aturely ending periods of tight monetary policy designed to bring down inflation. Several participants observed that as policy moved into restrictive territory, risks would become more two-sided, reflecting the emergence of the downside risk that the cumulative restraint in ag- gregate demand would exceed what was required to bring inflation back to 2 percent. A few of these partic- ipants noted that this possibility was heightened by fac- tors beyond the Committee’s actions, including the tightening of monetary policy stances abroad and the weakening global economic outlook, that were also likely to restrain domestic economic activity in the period ahead. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators had pointed to modest growth in spending and production. Members also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months and the unemployment rate had remained low. Members agreed that inflation remained elevated, re- flecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Members observed that Russia’s war against Ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. They also agreed that the war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. Members remarked that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. In their assessment of the monetary policy stance neces- sary for achieving the Committee’s maximum-employ- ment and price-stability goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 3 to 3¼ percent and anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate. In addition, mem- bers agreed that the Committee would continue reduc- ing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency MBS, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet issued in May. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. They also noted that their assessments would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, in- flation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. Members affirmed that the Committee was strongly committed to returning in- flation to its 2 percent objective. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective September 22, 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to:  Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 3 to 3¼ percent.  Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 3.25 percent and with an aggregate opera- tion limit of $500 billion; the aggregate op- eration limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 3.05 percent and with a per-counterparty Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the limit of $160 billion per day; per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair.  Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are the monthly cap. than less  Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month.  Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate has remained low. Inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbal- ances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Russia’s war against Ukraine is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship. The war and related events are creating additional up- ward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. The Committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 3 to 3¼ percent and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. In addition, the Com- mittee will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Re- serve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in May. The Committee is strongly committed to re- turning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michael S. Barr, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Susan M. Collins, Lisa D. Cook, Esther L. George, Philip N. Jefferson, Loretta J. Mester, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 3.15 percent, effective September 22, 2022. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to approve a ¾ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 3.25 percent, effective Sep- tember 22, 2022.6 6 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Rich- mond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and Dallas. This vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Gover- nors of the establishment of a 3.25 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of September 22, 2022, or the date such Reserve Banks inform the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Min- neapolis, and San Francisco were informed of the Board’s ap- proval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 3.25 percent, effective September 22, 2022.) Minutes of the Meeting of September 20–21, 2022Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, November 1–2, 2022. The meeting adjourned at 10:20 a.m. on Septem- ber 21, 2022. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on August 16, 2022, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 26–27, 2022. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee November 1–2, 2022 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, November 1, 2022, at 10:30 a.m. and con- tinued on Wednesday, November 2, 2022, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michael S. Barr Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Susan M. Collins Lisa D. Cook Esther L. George Philip N. Jefferson Loretta J. Mester Christopher J. Waller Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Neel Kashkari, Lorie K. Logan, and Helen E. Mucciolo, Alternate Members of the Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Brian M. Doyle, Carlos Garriga, Joseph W. Gruber, David E. Lebow, Ellis W. Tallman, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Patricia Zobel, Manager pro tem, System Open Market Account Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board Gene Amromin, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Alyssa Arute,2 Manager, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Kartik B. Athreya, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Penelope A. Beattie, Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board James P. Bergin, Deputy General Counsel, Federal Reserve Bank of New York David Bowman, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Isabel Cairó, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Mark A. Carlson, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Michele Cavallo, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Satyajit Chatterjee, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Daniel Cooper, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Stephanie E. Curcuru, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board Sally Davies,3 Senior Adviser, Division of International Finance, Board Burcu Duygan-Bump, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Eric M. Engen, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. 3 Attended opening remarks for Tuesday session only. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Eric C. Engstrom, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Julie Ann Remache, Policy and Market Monitoring Head, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of of Board Members, Board Board Members, Board Andrew Figura, Associate Director, Division of Argia M. Sbordone, Research Department Head, Research and Statistics, Board Federal Reserve Bank of New York Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Vice President, Research and Statistics, Board Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Etienne Gagnon, Assistant Director, Division of Chiara Scotti, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Board Members, Board Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Seth Searls,2 Associate Director, Federal Reserve Bank Division of Board Members, Board of New York Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision Nitish Ranjan Sinha, Special Adviser to the Board, and Regulation, Board Division of Board Members, Board David Glancy, Principal Economist, Division of Paul A. Smith, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Research and Statistics, Board Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Gustavo A. Suarez, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Research and Statistics, Board Matteo Iacoviello, Senior Associate Director, Division Paula Tkac, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve of International Finance, Board Bank of Atlanta Jane E. Ihrig, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Associate Director, Division of Board Members, Board Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Kurt F. Lewis, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Laura Lipscomb, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Mark Meder, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Fernanda Nechio, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Andrea Raffo, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Donielle A. Winford, Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Paul R. Wood, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rebecca Zarutskie, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Committee Ethics Discussion The Chair began with a discussion of ethical standards and acknowledged the great privilege and heavy respon- sibility that come with being entrusted to make policy decisions. There was agreement that the Federal Re- serve can be effective only when there is a foundation of public trust. Participants reaffirmed the importance of holding themselves and their staffs accountable for knowing and following the high ethical standards that are set in the Committee’s policies, including those on financial transactions and disclosure and on external communications. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager pro tem turned first to a discussion of fi- nancial market developments in the United States. Over Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the period, financial conditions had tightened amid ele- vated volatility across financial markets. The market-im- plied path of the policy rate rose, with the median federal funds rate values in the September Summary of Eco- nomic Projections and other Federal Reserve communi- cations being viewed by market participants as indicating a commitment to sustaining a restrictive monetary policy stance. With data received over the period also indicat- ing higher-than-expected core inflation, market partici- pants placed high odds on a 75 basis point increase in the target range at the current meeting. Nonetheless, contacts were increasingly focused on the question of when the Committee might slow the pace of future in- creases in light of the substantial tightening of financial conditions that had occurred over the year. Most re- spondents to the Open Market Desk’s surveys viewed a 50 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate at the December meeting as the most likely outcome. On net, nominal Treasury yields ended the period higher, reflecting both an upward revision in the expected path of the policy rate and higher estimated term premiums. Investment-grade bond yields and mortgage interest rates moved up as well, to the highest levels in many years. The manager pro tem turned next to a discussion of vol- atility in global financial markets. In September, an ex- pansionary budget announced by the U.K. government resulted in an extraordinary rise in yields on gilts (long- dated U.K. government securities) and reduced gilt mar- ket liquidity. Reflecting its financial stability objective, the Bank of England initiated a temporary gilt purchase program designed to address disorderly market condi- tions. These purchases and a subsequent cancellation of some expansionary U.K. budgetary measures resulted in a retracement of much of the earlier increase in gilt yields. announced Elevated volatility in international financial markets con- tributed to volatility in U.S. core fixed-income markets. In markets for U.S. Treasury securities, some measures of market-implied volatility approached pandemic-era levels. Spreads of yields on agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) over yields on Treasury securities wid- ened sharply, reflecting the sensitivity of these spreads to increased volatility. The increased volatility appeared to contribute to a decline in measures of market liquidity in core fixed-income markets, in particular around the period associated with U.K. volatility, but market func- tioning remained orderly. The foreign exchange value of the dollar appreciated fur- ther over the period. Market participants perceived sev- eral Asian economies as engaging in foreign exchange market interventions in response to rapid depreciations of local currencies. In the case of advanced economies, whose monetary policy tightening was well under way, market participants focused on communications per- ceived as signaling a potentially slower pace of policy rate increases in the period ahead. reverse the overnight The manager pro tem turned next to developments in money markets and Federal Reserve operations. Usage of repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility remained fairly steady other than dur- ing the period surrounding quarter-end. In the period ahead, the relative pace of decline in ON RRP facility balances and reserve balances would depend importantly on shifts in money market conditions. Recent develop- ments, including with regard to the relationship between ON RRP facility balances and money market rates, sug- gested that, over time, conditions could evolve in a man- ner that would lead to falling usage of the ON RRP fa- cility. However, the manager pro tem noted that money market conditions could change somewhat more quickly in the lead-up to year-end because of normal factors, such as a Treasury tax payment date in December that could increase the Treasury General Account balance, and year-end position adjustments. This prospect could require money market participants to be more respon- sive to shifting liquidity conditions and to plan ahead for the coming period. Current market quotes suggested ex- pectations of limited upward pressure on domestic money market rates around year-end. In offshore dollar funding markets, the premium associated with borrow- ing dollars was modestly higher than at similar points in previous years. Regarding Federal Reserve net income, 11 Reserve Banks reported deferred assets totaling $6.3 billion in the latest H.4.1 statistical release, reflect- ing the negative net income stemming from rising inter- est expense. Many other central banks also faced nega- tive net income. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the Novem- ber 1–2 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) had increased at a moderate pace in the third quarter after having declined over the first half of _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 1–2, 2022Page 3 the year. Labor market conditions remained quite tight, and consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for per- sonal consumption expenditures (PCE)—remained ele- vated. In September, total nonfarm payroll employment posted a solid gain that was somewhat slower than the pace seen in recent months, and the unemployment rate declined 0.2 percentage point to 3.5 percent. The unemployment rate for African Americans declined in September but was more than 2 percentage points above the national average; the unemployment rate for Hispanics declined to a level that was 0.3 percentage point above the na- tional measure. The labor force participation rate edged down in September, and the employment-to-population ratio was unchanged. The private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turn- over Survey, moved lower, on net, from July to Septem- ber but remained high. Nominal wage growth continued to be rapid: Average hourly earnings rose 5.0 percent over the 12 months ending in September, while the em- ployment cost index (ECI) of hourly compensation in the private sector, which also includes benefit costs, rose 5.2 percent over this period. However, the three-month change in the ECI in September was noticeably lower than the average pace seen over the first half of the year. Consumer price inflation remained elevated. Total PCE price inflation was 6.2 percent over the 12 months end- ing in September, and core PCE inflation, which ex- cludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 5.1 percent over the same pe- riod. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 4.7 percent in September. The staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expecta- tions and inflation compensation, was little changed in the third quarter but remained above pre-pandemic lev- els. Real PCE rose modestly in the third quarter. Residential investment dropped further, however, and business fixed investment growth was held back by a decline in nonresidential structures investment. Government pur- chases rose in the third quarter after having declined over the first half of the year. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in the third quarter. Net exports contributed positively to real GDP growth, as real exports stepped up while real imports declined. Data pointed to weakening foreign economic activity in recent months, weighed down by the economic fallout of Russia’s war against Ukraine, headwinds in China, and tighter financial conditions. In many advanced foreign economies, high inflation and disruptions to energy sup- ply contributed to a decline in real disposable incomes and depressed consumer and business confidence. In response, fiscal authorities in Europe and Japan an- nounced packages intended to ease the burden of high inflation on consumers and businesses. In China, data indicated weaker momentum in economic activity and a further deterioration in the property market. Weaker global demand has also resulted in a pronounced slow- down in manufacturing, which weighed on activity in ex- port-oriented emerging market economies in Asia. Con- sumer price inflation rose further in October in many foreign economies, reflecting past increases in energy and food prices, but also a continued broadening of in- flationary pressure within core prices. In response to high inflation, many central banks further tightened monetary policy, albeit at a slower pace in some cases. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, U.S. Treasury yields and the market-implied federal funds rate path moved sub- stantially higher. Broad domestic equity prices were little changed, on net, amid high market volatility, while cor- porate bond yields increased notably. The rise in bor- rowing costs appeared to have slowed the volume of fi- nancing in many credit markets. Credit quality remained sound overall, although there are some signs of deterio- ration for lower-rated borrowers. The expected path of the federal funds rate implied by a straight read of financial market quotes rose notably over the intermeeting period, largely reflecting more-re- strictive-than-expected monetary policy communica- tions and data releases that pointed to inflation moving down more slowly than previously expected. On net, nominal Treasury yields increased across the maturity spectrum. The increases in nominal yields at medium- and longer-term horizons were primarily accounted for by higher real yields, though inflation compensation measures rose as well. Broad equity price indexes fell significantly early in the intermeeting period, with inflation news and monetary policy expectations likely being the main drivers of stock price movements. However, equity prices later re- bounded and ended the period essentially unchanged on net. One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—declined slightly, on net, but re- mained at the upper end of its range since mid-2020. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period, with the September in- crease in the target range for the federal funds rate and the associated increases in the Federal Reserve’s admin- istered rates passing through quickly to overnight money market rates. In secured markets, money market rates remained soft relative to the ON RRP offering rate, at- tributed to subdued Treasury bill supply, elevated de- mand for Treasury collateral, and investor demand for very short-term assets amid uncertainty over the pace of policy rate increases. Daily take-up in the ON RRP fa- cility remained elevated amid this softness in repurchase agreement rates. Money market fund net yields rose along with the rise in administered rates, while retail bank deposit rates increased modestly on balance. Foreign asset prices were volatile over the intermeeting period as investors grappled with the combination of a deteriorating global growth outlook and synchronous policy tightening undertaken by major central banks in response to high inflation. Fiscal and political develop- ments in the United Kingdom added to market volatility but left little net imprint. On balance, sovereign bond yields in most advanced foreign economies rose mod- estly and equity prices were mixed. The U.S. dollar ap- preciated against most major currencies, driven by wid- ening yield differentials between the United States and the rest of the world and further deterioration of the for- eign growth outlook. The Japanese yen weakened against the dollar, on net, even though Japanese author- ities intervened to support the yen. The Chinese renminbi depreciated significantly against the dollar as continuation of the zero-COVID policy and increased investor concerns about longer-term growth prospects weighed on the currency. Investors continued to with- draw from dedicated emerging market economy and Eu- ropean funds amid further increases in U.S. Treasury yields and concerns over foreign economic growth. In domestic credit markets, borrowing costs continued to rise over the intermeeting period. Yields for corpo- rate bonds and institutional leveraged loans increased. Bank interest rates for commercial and industrial (C&I) loans continued the upward trend observed since the first quarter of 2022, while a rising proportion of small businesses reported facing increased borrowing costs in September. Municipal bond yields increased across rat- ings categories. Residential mortgage rates rose further in the period following the September FOMC meeting, nearly reaching their highest levels since 2002. Interest rates on existing credit card accounts continued to trend upward, reflecting increases in the federal funds rate that were quickly passed through to prime rates. Credit continued to be generally available to businesses and households despite some signs of tightening lending standards in certain segments, but high borrowing costs reduced the demand for credit in many markets. Issu- ance of corporate bonds, although quite strong in early September, slowed significantly in late September and October. Gross institutional leveraged loan issuance de- clined in September. Equity issuance and gross issuance of municipal bonds remained weak in September and October. Business loans at banks continued to expand in Septem- ber but at a slower pace than observed in past months. In the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported hav- ing tightened C&I and commercial real estate (CRE) lending standards over the previous three months. Meanwhile, issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) also slowed amid higher spreads. Credit appeared to remain generally available to most small businesses, though the share of small firms report- ing that it was more difficult to obtain loans than three months ago continued its upward trend in September. Credit remained available in the residential mortgage market for borrowers who are able to pay high interest rates. The number of home-purchase and refinance mortgage originations were about flat in August and September but down significantly from late last year. Consumer credit remained available for most borrowers in July and August, with auto credit and credit card credit growing at a robust pace. However, banks in the Octo- ber SLOOS reported being less likely to approve auto and credit card loans to subprime and near-prime bor- rowers compared with earlier this year. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations showed signs of deterioration in some sectors but remained gen- erally solid overall. The volume of corporate bond rat- ing upgrades was roughly on par with that of down- grades in September. However, upgrades were concen- trated in the investment-grade segment; in the specula- tive-grade segment, downgrades outpaced upgrades, and market-implied expectations of defaults over the next year increased markedly. Default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans rose slightly from low levels. The credit quality of C&I and CRE loans on banks’ bal- ance sheets also remained sound. Delinquency rates for CRE loans in non-agency CMBS pools ticked up in Sep- tember, as did indicators of future payment stress. De- linquency rates on small business loans remained quite low, and the credit quality of municipal securities re- mained strong. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 1–2, 2022Page 5 The credit quality of most households also appeared to remain solid. Delinquencies on residential mortgage loans continued to trend down, and the share of mort- gages in foreclosure in August remained close to pre- pandemic levels. Available data through the second quarter indicated that credit card and auto credit delin- quency rates continued to rise; however, delinquencies for auto loans were near their pre-pandemic levels, and those for credit cards remained well below pre-pandemic levels. The staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system. The staff noted that re- spondents to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s survey of near-term risks judged that economic, finan- cial, and geopolitical risks had risen across the globe. Amid this weaker outlook and higher interest rates, prices of risky assets generally fell, though real estate val- uations remained elevated. Household borrowing was moderate, and mortgage performance remained strong. Nonfinancial businesses’ leverage continued to decline, and interest coverage ratios continued to increase; how- ever, further increases in borrowing costs could pose risks to some borrowers’ ability to service their debts. In the financial sector, the results of this year’s stress test demonstrated that large banks remain resilient to a sub- stantial economic downturn, but there were indicators of elevated leverage at hedge funds and other nonbank financial institutions. Short-term funding markets con- tinued to have structural vulnerabilities. Funding risks at domestic banks remained low, but prime money mar- ket funds, other cash-investment vehicles, open-end mu- tual funds, and stablecoins all continued to be suscepti- ble to disruptive redemptions. Staff Economic Outlook The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the November FOMC meeting was weaker than the September forecast. Broad financial conditions were expected to be considerably more restrictive over the projection period than in September, reflecting both recent market moves and upward revisions to the staff’s assumptions regarding the future course of monetary policy based on recent Federal Reserve communications. As a result, output was expected to move below the staff’s estimate of potential early in 2024 and to remain below potential in 2025. Likewise, the unemployment rate was expected to be above the staff’s estimate of its natural rate in 2024 and 2025. On a 12-month change basis, total PCE price inflation was expected to be 5.3 percent in 2022 and core inflation was expected to be 4.6 percent. The staff raised their projection for core PCE price inflation in coming quar- ters, reflecting their assessment that the factors that had boosted inflation since the middle of last year—most notably, strong wage growth and the effect of supply constraints on prices—would persist for longer than previously thought. With the effects of supply–demand imbalances in goods markets expected to unwind and la- bor and product markets expected to become less tight, the staff continued to project that inflation would de- cline markedly over the next two years; in 2025, both to- tal and core PCE price inflation were expected to be 2 percent. With inflation remaining stubbornly high, the staff con- tinued to view the risks to the inflation projection as skewed to the upside. For real activity, sluggish growth in real private domestic spending, a deteriorating global outlook, and tightening financial conditions were all seen as salient downside risks to the projection for real activ- ity; in addition, the possibility that a persistent reduction in inflation could require a greater-than-assumed amount of tightening in financial conditions was seen as another downside risk. The staff, therefore, continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside and viewed the possibility that the economy would enter a recession sometime over the next year as almost as likely as the baseline. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that recent indicators pointed to modest growth of spending and production. Nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate had remained low. Inflation remained el- evated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Participants recognized that Russia’s war against Ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. The war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on in- flation and were weighing on global economic activity. Against this background, participants continued to be highly attentive to inflation risks. With regard to current economic activity and the near- term outlook, participants observed that although real GDP rebounded in the third quarter, recent data sug- gested that economic activity in the near term appeared likely to expand at a pace below its trend growth rate. Participants noted a softening in consumer and business spending growth, and some participants remarked that Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ there had been a notable slowing in interest rate-sensi- tive sectors, particularly housing, in response to the tightening of financial conditions associated with the Committee’s policy actions. With inflation remaining far too high and showing few signs of moderating, partici- pants observed that a period of below-trend real GDP growth would be helpful in bringing aggregate supply and aggregate demand into better balance, reducing in- flationary pressures, and setting the stage for the sus- tained achievement of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability. In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that growth in consumer spending had softened recently. Several participants remarked that there had been a reduction in discretionary expenditures, especially among lower- and middle-income households, whose purchases were shifting toward lower-cost options. Par- ticipants observed that, in aggregate, household-sector balance sheets were still strong and that this factor would continue to support consumer spending. A few partici- pants noted that some households had been running down the additional savings they had accumulated dur- ing the pandemic and that there were reports of a rise in the number of households experiencing financial strains. Participants commented that higher mortgage interest rates had notably restrained housing activity. With regard to the business sector, participants noted that growth in investment spending was modest. Several participants observed that business investment was be- ing weighed down by tighter financial conditions, al- though a few participants reported that some business contacts indicated that their investment spending had been resilient. Some participants mentioned reports re- ceived from business contacts of easing supply bottle- necks, reflected in declines in shipping costs and delivery times, although the reported extent of these improve- ments varied across contacts. A few participants re- marked that, in instances in which supply constraints had eased, their business contacts found it easier to plan production or had diminished needs to maintain precau- tionary inventories. A couple of participants noted that drought conditions in the Midwest were making some waterways, notably the Mississippi River System, less navigable. These conditions were creating new supply constraints and putting upward pressures on transporta- tion costs and prices for farm products. Participants observed that, with inflation elevated glob- ally, many central banks were tightening monetary policy simultaneously, contributing to an overall tightening of global financial conditions. Participants further noted that the overall tightening of global financial conditions, along with energy prices and other headwinds, was con- tributing to a slowdown in the growth rate of global real GDP. Participants remarked that the foreign economic slowdown, in combination with a strong U.S. dollar, was likely to weigh on the U.S. export sector, and several par- ticipants commented that there could be wider spillovers to the U.S. economy. Participants observed that the labor market had re- mained very tight, with the unemployment rate near a historically low level, the number of job vacancies very high, a low pace of layoffs, robust employment gains, and elevated nominal wage growth. Some participants remarked that employers in certain sectors, such as health care, leisure and hospitality, or construction, faced particularly acute labor shortages and that these short- ages were contributing to especially strong wage pres- sures in those sectors. Participants commented on the labor market having remained strong to date, even alongside the slowing in economic activity. A number of participants remarked that some businesses were keen to retain workers after their recent experiences of labor shortages and hiring challenges. These participants noted that this consideration had limited layoffs even as the broader economy had softened or that this behavior could limit layoffs if aggregate economic activity were to soften further. Nevertheless, many participants noted tentative signs that the labor market might be moving slowly toward a better balance of supply and demand; these signs included a lower rate of job turnover and a moderation in nominal wage growth. Participants antic- ipated that imbalances in the labor market would gradu- ally diminish and that the unemployment rate would likely rise somewhat from its current very low level, while vacancies would likely fall. Participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high and was well above the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. Some participants noted that the burden of high inflation was falling disproportionally on low-in- come households, for whom necessities like food, en- ergy, and shelter make up a larger share of expenditures. Many participants observed that price pressures had in- creased in the services sector and that, historically, price pressures in this sector had been more persistent than those in the goods sector. Some participants noted that the recent high pace of nominal wage growth, taken to- gether with the recent low pace of productivity growth, would, if sustained, be inconsistent with achievement of the 2 percent inflation objective. Several participants, however, commented on signs of a moderation in nom- _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 1–2, 2022Page 7 inal wage growth. Participants agreed that near-term in- flation pressures were high, but some noted that lower commodity prices or the expected reduced pressure on goods prices due to an easing of supply constraints should contribute to lower inflation in the medium term. Several participants remarked that rent increases on new leases had been slowing in recent months, but partici- pants also noted that it would take some time for this development to show up in PCE inflation. Several par- ticipants summarized reports provided by business con- tacts about their firms’ ability to pass on higher input costs to their customers. These reports suggested that some firms continued to have solid pricing power, while in other cases cost pass-through had become more dif- ficult. Participants remarked that, overall, measures of me- dium- and longer-term inflation expectations obtained from surveys of households and businesses as well as from financial markets quotes appeared to have re- mained well anchored. A couple of participants ob- served that longer-term inflation expectations were sta- ble even as measures of near-term inflation expectations responded to realized inflation in line with historical pat- terns. Participants noted that longer-term inflation ex- pectations were an important influence on inflation’s be- havior and stressed that the Committee’s ongoing mon- etary policy tightening would be essential for ensuring that these expectations remained well anchored. Several participants expressed the concern that the longer infla- tion remained well above the 2 percent goal, the greater the risk that longer-term inflation expectations could be- come unanchored. Such a development, if it material- ized, would make it much more costly to bring inflation down and to achieve the Committee’s statutory objec- tives of maximum employment and price stability. A couple of participants discussed the high dispersion of longer-term inflation expectations across respondents in various surveys: These participants noted that the higher dispersion may signal increased uncertainty about the in- flation outlook and was a reason not to be complacent about longer-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. Participants discussed the length of the lags in the re- sponse of the economy to monetary policy actions, tak- ing into account historical experience and the various es- timates of timing relationships provided in economic re- search, as well as the high degree of uncertainty involved in applying the evidence on lags to the current situation. They noted that monetary policy tightening typically produced rapid effects on financial conditions but that the full effects of changes in financial conditions on ag- gregate spending and the labor market, and then on in- flation, likely took longer to materialize. With regard to current circumstances, many participants remarked that, even though the tightening of monetary policy had clearly influenced financial conditions and had had no- table effects in some interest rate-sensitive sectors, the timing of the effects on overall economic activity, the labor market, and inflation was still quite uncertain, with the full extent of the effects yet to be realized. Several participants observed that, because of the difficulties in isolating the effects of monetary policy, changes in eco- nomic structure, or increasing transparency over time re- garding monetary policy decisions, the historical record did not provide definitive evidence on the length of these lags. In addition, some participants noted that the post-pandemic dynamics of the economy may differ from those prevailing prior to the pandemic. Participants generally noted that the uncertainty associ- ated with their economic outlooks was high and that the risks to the inflation outlook remained tilted to the up- side. Participants observed that recent inflation had been higher and more persistent than anticipated. Some participants noted the risk that energy prices could rise sharply again amid geopolitical tensions. A few partici- pants commented that the ongoing tightness in the labor market could lead to an emergence of a wage–price spi- ral, even though one had not yet developed. A number of participants judged that the risks regarding the outlook for economic activity were weighted to the downside, with various global headwinds being promi- nently cited. These global headwinds included a slow- down in economic activity occurring in China and the ongoing international economic implications of Russia’s war against Ukraine. Participants observed that, because of high inflation pressures prevailing globally, monetary policy tightening was under way in many other econo- mies—a development likely to affect foreign economic activity and carrying the potential for spillovers to the U.S. economy. In their discussion of issues related to financial stability, participants noted the importance of orderly functioning of the market for U.S. Treasury securities for the trans- mission of monetary policy, for meeting the financing needs of the federal government, and for the operation of the global financial system. Participants observed that, despite elevated interest rate volatility and indica- tions of strained liquidity conditions, the functioning of the Treasury securities market had been orderly. Noting that the value of resilience of the market for Treasury Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ securities was underlined by recent gilt market disrup- tions in the United Kingdom, a number of participants discussed a range of issues that could be considered by the appropriate authorities regarding market resilience, including potential interactions of capital and liquidity regulations with market activity, oversight of key market participants, clearing and settlement practices, and the role and structure of the Federal Reserve’s standing fa- cilities. A few participants noted the importance of be- ing prepared to address disruptions in U.S. core market functioning in ways that would not affect the stance of monetary policy, especially during episodes of monetary policy tightening. Several participants noted the risks posed by nonbank financial institutions amid the rapid global tightening of monetary policy and the potential for hidden leverage in these institutions to amplify shocks. In their consideration of appropriate monetary policy ac- tions at this meeting, participants concurred that infla- tion remained well above the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent and the recent data on inflation pro- vided very few signs that inflation pressures were abat- ing. The economic expansion had slowed significantly from last year’s rapid pace, and recent indicators pointed to modest growth in spending and production in the cur- rent quarter. Despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remained extremely tight, and nominal wage growth remained elevated. Against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 75 basis points at this meeting and to continue the process of reducing the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Bal- ance Sheet that the Committee issued in May. Partici- pants observed that the policy rate hike at this meeting was another step toward making the Committee’s mon- etary policy stance sufficiently restrictive to help ease supply and demand imbalances and to return inflation to 2 percent over time. In their discussion of the effects of monetary policy ac- tions and communications to date, participants con- curred that the Committee had taken forceful steps to moderate aggregate demand in order to bring it into bet- ter alignment with aggregate supply. Financial condi- tions had tightened significantly in response to the Com- mittee’s policy actions, and their effects were clearly ev- ident in the most interest rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, including residential investment and some components of business investment. Several partici- pants commented that monetary policy actions and communications had helped keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored—a situation that would help facilitate the return of inflation to the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. Nevertheless, with realized inflation well above that goal and the labor market still very tight, participants agreed that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be ap- propriate and would help keep longer-term inflation ex- pectations well anchored. Participants noted that, with regard to both real economic activity and inflation, it would take time for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized and that these lags complicated an assess- ment of the effects of monetary policy. In discussing potential policy actions at upcoming meet- ings, participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent objec- tive, and they continued to anticipate that ongoing in- creases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate in order to attain a sufficiently re- strictive stance of policy to bring inflation down over time. Many participants commented that there was sig- nificant uncertainty about the ultimate level of the fed- eral funds rate needed to achieve the Committee’s goals and that their assessment of that level would depend, in part, on incoming data. Even so, various participants noted that, with inflation showing little sign thus far of abating, and with supply and demand imbalances in the economy persisting, their assessment of the ultimate level of the federal funds rate that would be necessary to achieve the Committee’s goals was somewhat higher than they had previously expected. Participants mentioned a number of considerations that would likely influence the pace of future increases in the target range for the federal funds rate. These consider- ations included the cumulative tightening of monetary policy to date, the lags between monetary policy actions and the behavior of economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. A number of participants observed that, as monetary policy ap- proached a stance that was sufficiently restrictive to achieve the Committee’s goals, it would become appro- priate to slow the pace of increase in the target range for the federal funds rate. In addition, a substantial majority of participants judged that a slowing in the pace of in- crease would likely soon be appropriate. A slower pace in these circumstances would better allow the Commit- tee to assess progress toward its goals of maximum em- ployment and price stability. The uncertain lags and magnitudes associated with the effects of monetary pol- icy actions on economic activity and inflation were among the reasons cited regarding why such an assess- ment was important. A few participants commented _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 1–2, 2022Page 9 that slowing the pace of increase could reduce the risk of instability in the financial system. A few other partic- ipants noted that, before slowing the pace of policy rate increases, it could be advantageous to wait until the stance of policy was more clearly in restrictive territory and there were more concrete signs that inflation pres- sures were receding significantly. With monetary policy approaching a sufficiently restric- tive stance, participants emphasized that the level to which the Committee ultimately raised the target range for the federal funds rate, and the evolution of the policy stance thereafter, had become more important consider- ations for achieving the Committee’s goals than the pace of further increases in the target range. Participants agreed that communicating this distinction to the public was important in order to reinforce the Committee’s strong commitment to returning inflation to the 2 per- cent objective. Participants discussed a number of risk-management considerations related to the conduct of monetary pol- icy. In light of the continuing broad-based and unac- ceptably high level of inflation and upside risks to the inflation outlook, participants remarked that purpose- fully moving to a more restrictive policy stance was con- sistent with risk-management considerations. Some par- ticipants observed that there had been an increase in the risk that the cumulative policy restraint would exceed what was required to bring inflation back to 2 percent. Several participants commented that continued rapid policy tightening increased the risk of instability or dis- locations in the financial system. There was wide agree- ment that heightened uncertainty regarding the outlooks for both inflation and real activity underscored the im- portance of taking into account the cumulative tighten- ing of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affected economic activity and inflation, and eco- nomic and financial developments. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators had pointed to modest growth in spending and production. Members also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Members agreed that inflation had remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Members observed that Russia’s war against Ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. They also agreed that the war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. Members concurred that they remained highly attentive to infla- tion risks. Members agreed that the Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 per- cent over the longer run. In support of these goals, members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 3¾ to 4 percent. Members anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropri- ate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy suffi- ciently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Members agreed to add language to this effect in the postmeeting statement, on the grounds that this would underscore the Committee’s view that a suffi- ciently restrictive stance of monetary policy was needed for achieving its dual-mandate goals. Members agreed that, in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, they would take into account the cumula- tive tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affected economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. Members agreed to add language to this effect in the postmeeting statement in order to convey explicitly the range of fac- tors that they would consider in determining future monetary policy actions. In addition, members agreed that they would continue reducing the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in May. All members affirmed that they were strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objec- tive. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. They would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Members agreed that their assessments will take into ac- count a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pres- sures and inflation expectations, and financial and inter- national developments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ “Effective November 3, 2022, Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: the Federal • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 3¾ to 4 percent. • Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 4 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate opera- tion limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 3.8 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-coun- terparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are the monthly cap. than less • Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate has remained low. Inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbal- ances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Russia’s war against Ukraine is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship. The war and related events are creating additional up- ward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. The Committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 3¾ to 4 percent. The Committee anticipates that ongoing in- creases in the target range will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. In determining the pace of future increases in the target range, the Com- mittee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial devel- opments. In addition, the Committee will con- tinue reducing its holdings of Treasury securi- ties and agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Bal- ance Sheet that were issued in May. The Com- mittee is strongly committed to returning infla- tion to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michael S. Barr, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Susan M. Collins, Lisa D. Cook, Esther L. George, Philip N. Jefferson, Loretta J. Mester, and Christopher J. Waller. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of November 1–2, 2022Page 11 Voting against this action: None. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 3.9 per- cent, effective November 3, 2022. The Board of Gov- ernors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to approve a ¾ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 4 percent, effective November 3, 2022.4 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, December 13– 14, 2022. The meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. on No- vember 2, 2022. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on October 11, 2022, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on September 20–21, 2022. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary 4 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco. This vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Gover- nors of the establishment of a 4 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of November 3, 2022, or the date such Reserve Banks inform the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Phil- adelphia, and Kansas City were informed of the Board’s ap- proval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 4 per- cent, effective November 3, 2022.) Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee December 13–14, 2022 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, December 13, 2022, at 10:00 a.m. and con- tinued on Wednesday, December 14, 2022, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michael S. Barr Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard James Bullard Susan M. Collins Lisa D. Cook Esther L. George Philip N. Jefferson Loretta J. Mester Christopher J. Waller Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Neel Kashkari, Lorie K. Logan, and Helen E. Mucciolo, Alternate Members of the Committee Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively James A. Clouse, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Richard Ostrander, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Carlos Garriga, Joseph W. Gruber, and William Wascher, Associate Economists David Altig, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Roc Armenter, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Kartik B. Athreya, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Penelope A. Beattie, Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board Daniel O. Beltran, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board Ellen J. Bromagen, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Jennifer J. Burns, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board Mark A. Carlson, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Todd E. Clark, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Stephanie E. Curcuru, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board Navtej S. Dhillon, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Burcu Duygan-Bump, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Eric M. Engen, Senior Associate Director, Division of Patricia Zobel, Manager pro tem, System Open Market Research and Statistics, Board Account Eric C. Engstrom, Associate Director, Division of Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division Monetary Affairs, Board of Information Technology, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, of Board Members, Board Board Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Raven Molloy, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Research and Statistics, Board Joshua Gallin, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Norman J. Morin, Deputy Associate Director, Division Division of Board Members, Board of Research and Statistics, Board Jonathan E. Goldberg, Principal Economist, Division Michelle M. Neal, Head of Markets, Federal Reserve of Monetary Affairs, Board Bank of New York Erik A. Heitfield, Deputy Associate Director, Division Giovanni Nicolò, Senior Economist, Division of of Research and Statistics, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Anna Nordstrom, Capital Markets Trading Head, Monetary Affairs, Board Federal Reserve Bank of New York Jane E. Ihrig, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Marcelo Ochoa,3 Principal Economist, Division of Board Members, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Benjamin K. Johannsen, Section Chief, Division of Giovanni Olivei, Senior Vice President, Federal Monetary Affairs, Board Reserve Bank of Boston Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Anna Paulson, Executive Vice President, Federal Financial Stability, Board Reserve Bank of Chicago Don H. Kim, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Andrea Raffo, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Affairs, Board Bank of Minneapolis Elizabeth K. Kiser, Associate Director, Division of Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Board Members, Board Sylvain Leduc, Executive Vice President, Federal Achilles Sangster II, Senior Information Manager, Reserve Bank of San Francisco Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Anthony Sarver, Senior Financial Institution and Policy Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Paul Lengermann, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board John W. Schindler,4 Senior Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Eric LeSueur,2 Policy and Market Monitoring Advisor, Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Kurt F. Lewis, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Seth Searls,2 Policy and Market Monitoring Associate Director, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Laura Lipscomb, Special Adviser to the Board, Nitish Ranjan Sinha, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Division of Board Members, Board David López-Salido, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Clara Vega, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Jonathan P. McCarthy, Economic Research Advisor, Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, Senior Adviser, Division of Federal Reserve Bank of New York Monetary Affairs, Board 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 4 Attended opening remarks for Tuesday’s session only. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Min Wei, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Paul R. Wood, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rebecca Zarutskie, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Selection of Committee Officer By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Richard Ostrander to serve as deputy general counsel, effective December 13, 2022, until the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2023. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager pro tem turned first to a discussion of de- velopments in financial markets. Following several months of tightening, financial conditions eased over the period as investor concerns about global risks edged lower and incoming data showed nascent signs of a moderation in inflationary pressures. Central bank com- munications signaling a slower pace of policy rate in- creases appeared to contribute to improved sentiment. Measures of implied volatility across financial markets declined somewhat from the elevated levels observed in October. Consistent with the decline in volatility, model-based measures suggested that a drop in term premiums accounted for much of the decline in Treasury yields over the period. Equity markets moved higher. However, equity market contacts noted risks to growth ahead, and earnings expectations for coming quarters had been marked down. In foreign exchange markets, moderating concerns about the potential for highly ele- vated U.S. interest rates spurred a depreciation in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. In other market developments, the manager pro tem noted the failure of a prominent crypto-asset exchange. While the spillovers from this situation had been significant among other crypto lenders and exchanges, the collapse was not seen as posing broader market risks to the financial system. Regarding the outlook for inflation in the United States, inflation compensation implied by Treasury Inflation Protected Securities declined over the period, respond- ing to lower-than-expected consumer price index (CPI) data and a sizable drop in oil prices. However, the Desk survey-based measures of inflation expectations were lit- tle changed from the prior survey, suggesting that falling inflation risk premiums may have contributed to the moves. Both market- and survey-based measures con- tinued to point to expectations for a moderation of in- flation over the coming year. Regarding the outlook for monetary policy, both mar- ket- and Desk survey-based measures indicated expecta- tions for the Committee to maintain elevated policy rates through 2023. In the December survey, the median re- spondent’s modal expectation for the path of the federal funds rate in 2023 shifted higher by 25 basis points rela- tive to the November survey. The survey-based estimate of the expected policy path in 2024 continued to suggest a decline in the target range for the federal funds rate over 2024, little changed from the path anticipated in the November survey. In contrast, the market-implied path of the federal funds rate in 2024 shifted down by as much as ¾ percentage point over the period, likely re- flecting declining risk premiums. The manager pro tem turned next to a discussion of op- erations and money markets and assessed that balance sheet runoff was proceeding smoothly. Repurchase agreement (repo) rates firmed modestly relative to the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) fa- cility rate over the period with balance sheet reduction reportedly contributing, in part, to an increase in the de- mand for financing of Treasury securities. ON RRP bal- ances declined, on net, as money market funds shifted investments out of the ON RRP facility, reportedly in favor of higher rates available in repo markets. In recent months, banks continued to increase their use of wholesale funding. In addition, survey information suggested that banks expected to move deposit rates modestly higher relative to the target range in coming months. Over time, greater competition among banks for funding could contribute to drawdowns in the ON RRP facility. Staff indicated that they would con- tinue to monitor money market conditions closely as bal- ance sheet reduction proceeds. Looking ahead to year end, market participants antici- pated limited pressures. The manager pro tem noted that if transitory pressures emerged in money markets, the Federal Reserve’s backstop facilities are available to support effective policy implementation and smooth market functioning. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Minutes of the Meeting of December 13–14, 2022Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the Decem- ber 13–14 meeting suggested that U.S. real gross domes- tic product (GDP) was increasing at a modest pace in the fourth quarter of 2022 after expanding strongly in the third quarter. Labor market conditions eased some- what over October and November but remained quite tight. Consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)—stepped down in October but continued to be elevated. Total nonfarm payroll employment posted solid gains in October and November that were slower than the aver- age monthly pace seen over the earlier part of the year. The unemployment rate moved up 0.2 percentage point to 3.7 percent in October and remained at that rate in November. On balance, the unemployment rate for Af- rican Americans edged down over those two months, while the unemployment rate for Hispanics increased slightly; the unemployment rates for both groups re- mained above the national measure. Both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to- population ratio declined a little over the past two months. The private-sector job openings rate, as meas- ured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, moved back down in October but remained high. Nominal wage growth continued to be elevated and re- mained above the pace judged to be consistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective. Average hourly earnings rose 5.1 percent over the 12 months ending in November, close to the pace recorded in the employ- ment cost index of hourly compensation in the private sector over the 12 months ending in September. Com- pensation per hour (CPH) in the business sector rose 4.0 percent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter, but the reported increase likely understated the true pace of increase in CPH, as the lower second-quar- ter employment data from the Quarterly Census of Em- ployment and Wages had not yet been incorporated in the CPH measure. Consumer price inflation remained elevated but had eased in recent months. Total PCE price inflation was 6.0 percent over the 12 months ending in October, 0.3 percentage point below the September figure. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in con- sumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 5.0 percent over the 12 months ending in October, down 0.2 percentage point from its September reading. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price in- flation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dal- las remained at 4.7 percent in October. In November, the 12-month change in the CPI stepped down to 7.1 percent and core CPI inflation dropped to 6.0 per- cent. The CPI, along with data from the producer price index, pointed to a further slowing in PCE price inflation in November. A preliminary estimate of the staff’s com- mon inflation expectations index, which combines infor- mation from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, edged down in the fourth quarter but continued to be above pre-pandemic levels. After expanding at a moderate pace in the third quarter, real PCE growth appeared to have picked up in the fourth quarter. In contrast, residential investment looked to be contracting sharply further, and growth in business fixed investment seemed to be slowing mark- edly, with tepid gains in equipment and intangibles spending and continued declines in nonresidential struc- tures investment. Manufacturing production increased only modestly in October, and the available data pointed to a decline in November. A decrease in factory output would be consistent with recent readings from national and regional manufacturing surveys, which showed de- clining new orders and a drawdown in order backlogs. After narrowing in the third quarter, the nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in October. Real goods exports fell, led by declines in exports of industrial supplies and consumer goods. Real goods imports rose, driven by increases in imports of industrial supplies, which more than offset declines in imports of capital goods and consumer goods. Exports of services rose, in part as travel exports continued to recover, while im- ports of services were little changed. Foreign economic activity grew at a moderate pace in the third quarter, but more recent data pointed to weakening growth, weighed down by the economic fallout of Rus- sia’s war against Ukraine and a COVID-19-related slow- down in China. High inflation continued to contribute to a decline in real disposable incomes, which, together with disruptions to energy supplies, depressed economic activity, especially in Europe. In China, authorities be- gan to ease social restrictions even as COVID cases surged, raising the prospect of significant disruptions to economic activity in the near term, but also a faster reo- pening. Weaker global demand and high interest rates also weighed on activity in emerging market economies. Despite tentative signs of easing in foreign headline in- flation, core inflationary pressures remained elevated in Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ many countries. In response to high inflation, many cen- tral banks further tightened monetary policy, albeit at a slower pace in some cases. period, mostly passing through the increase in adminis- tered rates, while bank deposit rates increased only slightly in October and November. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, Treasury yields and measures of inflation compensation declined, on net, and the implied path of the federal funds rate in 2023 ended modestly lower. Stock market indexes rose, on balance, likely reflecting reduced concerns about the in- flation outlook, and market volatility declined notably. Borrowing costs declined, on net, over the intermeeting period. Credit flows moderated a bit in recent months, and the credit quality of businesses and most households remained solid. The expected path of the federal funds rate implied by a straight read of financial market quotes ended the inter- meeting period lower, largely reflecting data releases that pointed to a larger-than-expected moderation in infla- tion. Medium-to-longer-term nominal Treasury yields declined substantially over the intermeeting period, driven primarily by lower-than-expected inflation data releases, which appeared to prompt a substantial reduc- tion in investors’ concerns about the possibility that in- flation would remain high for a long period. In line with those developments, inflation compensation measures based on inflation swaps declined notably, especially for shorter maturities. Broad stock price indexes increased, likely reflecting re- duced concerns about the inflation outlook and the as- sociated implications for the future path of policy. On net, the one-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—the VIX—decreased notably and was around the middle of its range since mid-2020. In line with re- duced investor concerns about the inflation outlook, spreads of interest rates on corporate debt, mortgage- backed securities, and municipal bonds to comparable- duration Treasury yields all narrowed over the intermeet- ing period. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period, with the November in- crease in the target range for the federal funds rate and the associated increases in the Federal Reserve’s admin- istered rates passing through quickly to overnight money market rates. In secured markets, repo rates were below the ON RRP offering rate less frequently than in the pre- vious intermeeting period. Daily take-up in the ON RRP facility declined modestly, consistent with the recent firming in overnight repo rates. Net yields on money market funds rose further over the intermeeting Foreign financial conditions broadly eased over the in- termeeting period, largely driven by lower-than-expected U.S. inflation data. The foreign exchange value of the dollar depreciated against most foreign currencies, par- ticularly against those of advanced foreign economies, in part reflecting a narrowing of near-term yield differen- tials between the United States and other advanced economies. Investors reacted positively to news of an easing of COVID restrictions in China, which drove risky asset prices significantly higher despite near-term challenges associated with the health policy shift. Emerging market fund outflows moderated and turned to inflows later in the intermeeting period. Option- implied volatility measures for exchange rates and benchmark foreign yields declined but remained ele- vated by historical norms amid a high degree of uncer- tainty around global inflation and the prospects for a re- opening of the Chinese economy. In domestic credit markets, changes in borrowing costs were mixed during the intermeeting period but remained above levels observed at the end of the previous tight- ening cycle. Yields for corporate bonds declined, while borrowing costs for leveraged loans remained at an ele- vated level. Bank interest rates for commercial and in- dustrial (C&I) loans continued to trend up in the third quarter. Municipal bond yields also decreased across rat- ing categories. Residential mortgage rates fell, on net, after the November FOMC meeting. In contrast, inter- est rates in credit card offers continued to increase, re- flecting the higher prime rate that was quickly passed through. Interest rates on auto loans also rose steadily through November. Credit continued to be generally available to businesses and households, but high borrowing costs appeared to weigh on financing volumes in many markets. Issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds rebounded some- what in late October and November from earlier sub- dued levels, while speculative-grade issuance remained soft. New launches of leveraged loans picked up in No- vember, particularly for higher-rated firms. Business loan originations continued to expand in Octo- ber and November but at a slower pace than observed in previous months. C&I loans continued to grow in October and November but decelerated relative to the third-quarter pace, moderating the robust rate of growth observed earlier this year. Nonetheless, the volume of Minutes of the Meeting of December 13–14, 2022Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ C&I lending remained solid overall. Commercial real es- tate (CRE) loans outstanding at commercial banks con- tinued to increase in October and November, but the recent pace was somewhat lower than in previous months. In addition, banks increased CRE originations to multifamily and industrial properties relative to office properties, reflecting caution in the context of rising of- fice vacancies. Moreover, commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) issuance softened somewhat in Octo- ber amid elevated financing costs and tighter underwrit- ing standards. Credit availability to small businesses ap- peared to have tightened further this fall, with the share of small firms reporting that it was more difficult to ob- tain credit than three months earlier trending up through November. Credit was readily available in the residential mortgage market for high-credit-score borrowers who met stand- ard conforming loan criteria. Credit availability for households with lower credit scores was considerably tighter at levels comparable with what prevailed before the pandemic. The number of home purchases and re- finance mortgage rate locks edged lower at subdued lev- els despite recent declines in mortgage interest rates. In contrast, home equity lines of credit (HELOCs) grew notably in recent months, on net, potentially reflecting homeowners using HELOCs as a preferred way of ex- tracting home equity in the presence of high mortgage rates. Consumer credit remained available for most con- sumers through September, with auto loans and credit card debt growing at a robust pace. Bank credit data also indicate that the expansion in credit card balances con- tinued in October before slowing in early November. The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained solid. The volume of speculative-grade corporate bond downgrades slightly exceeded upgrades in October and investment-grade corporate November, while for bonds, the volume of upgrades turned positive, on net, in November. Leveraged loans experienced net down- grades in October, but the pace of net downgrades slowed substantially in recent weeks. Default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans remained at very low levels. However, measures of expected default probabilities for corporate bonds and leveraged loans had increased from their levels at the beginning of the year in recent months. Overall, the credit quality of mu- nicipalities remained robust amid strong revenues at state and local governments. The credit quality of busi- nesses that borrow from banks remained sound on bal- ance. Delinquencies on C&I loans stayed flat, and those on small businesses loans continued to edge up, but de- linquencies remained low relative to historical levels. In addition, the credit quality of non-agency CMBS loan borrowers deteriorated slightly, with average delin- quency rates ticking up in September and October, driven by the office and retail sectors. The credit quality of most households remained solid overall. Delinquencies on conventional mortgages con- tinued to trend down through October, while those on Federal Housing Administration mortgages ticked up a bit from low levels. In contrast, delinquency rates for credit cards and auto loans continued to rise over the third quarter. While delinquency rates on credit cards remained low relative to their historical range, those on auto loans surpassed their pre-pandemic peak. Staff Economic Outlook The forecast for U.S. economic activity prepared by the staff for the December FOMC meeting was not as weak as the November projection. Recent data suggested that real GDP growth in the second half of 2022 was stronger than previously expected, but economic growth was still forecast to slow markedly in 2023 from its sec- ond-half pace. Broad financial conditions were pro- jected to be somewhat less restrictive than previously as- sumed, as the effects of a higher path for equity values and a lower path for the dollar more than offset a higher medium-term trajectory for interest rates. Nevertheless, the forecast for U.S. real GDP growth through 2025 re- mained subdued. The staff slightly lowered its outlook for potential output, reflecting a lower expected trend in labor force participation. Moreover, the staff assumed a slower pace of decline in the natural rate of unemploy- ment over the near term in response to recent estimates suggesting that job-matching efficiency was not improv- ing as fast as previously anticipated. With all these changes, output was expected to move below the staff’s estimate of potential near the end of 2024—a year later than in the previous forecast—and to remain below po- tential in 2025. Likewise, the unemployment rate was expected to move above the staff’s estimate of its natural rate near the end of 2024 and remain above it in 2025. On a four-quarter change basis, total PCE price inflation was expected to be 5.5 percent in 2022, while core infla- tion was expected to be 4.7 percent, both lower than in the November projection. With the effects of supply– demand imbalances in goods markets expected to un- wind further and labor and product markets projected to become less tight, the staff continued to forecast that in- flation would decline markedly over the next two years. Core goods inflation was anticipated to slow further, housing services inflation was expected to peak in 2023 and then move down, while core non-housing services Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ inflation was forecast to move down as wage growth eased. In 2025, both total and core PCE price inflation were expected to be near 2 percent. With inflation still elevated, the staff continued to view the risks to the inflation projection as skewed to the up- side. Moreover, the sluggish growth in real private do- mestic spending expected over the next year, a subdued global economic outlook, and persistently tight financial conditions were seen as tilting the risks to the downside around the baseline projection for real economic activ- ity, and the staff still viewed the possibility of a recession sometime over the next year as a plausible alternative to the baseline. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2022 through 2025 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of ap- propriate monetary policy, including the path of the fed- eral funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, un- der appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Eco- nomic Projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that recent indicators pointed to modest growth of spending and production. Nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate had remained low. Inflation remained el- evated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Participants recognized that Russia’s war against Ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. The war and related events were contributing to upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. Against this background, participants continued to be highly at- tentive to inflation risks. Participants observed that the growth of economic ac- tivity had slowed significantly in 2022 from the previous year’s robust pace, partly in response to the Committee’s policy actions. The effects of those actions were espe- cially notable in interest-sensitive sectors, particularly housing. Participants remarked that, although real GDP appeared to have rebounded moderately in the second half of 2022 after declining somewhat in the first half, economic activity appeared likely to expand in 2023 at a pace well below its trend growth rate. With inflation re- maining unacceptably high, participants expected that a sustained period of below-trend real GDP growth would be needed to bring aggregate supply and aggregate de- mand into better balance and thereby reduce inflationary pressures. In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that growth in consumer spending in September and October had been stronger than they had previously expected, likely supported by a strong labor market and households running down excess savings accumulated during the pandemic. A couple of participants remarked that excess savings likely would continue to support con- sumption spending for a while. A couple of other par- ticipants, however, commented that excess savings, par- ticularly among low-income households, appeared to be lower and declining more rapidly than previously thought or that the savings, the majority of which ap- peared to be held by higher-income households, might continue to be largely unspent. Several participants re- marked that budgets were stretched for low-to-moder- ate-income households and that many consumers were shifting their spending to less expensive alternatives. They also observed that many households were increas- ingly using credit to finance spending. Overall, partici- pants assessed that there was considerable uncertainty around the consumer spending outlook. Participants commented that higher mortgage interest rates had no- tably restrained housing activity and that they expected housing activity to remain weak. A couple of partici- pants remarked on anecdotes or concerns from builder contacts about contract cancellations by purchasers no longer able to qualify for loans at higher interest rates. With regard to the business sector, participants noted that growth in investment spending appeared modest and was being restrained by high borrowing costs and an outlook for slow growth of final demand, although views on investment prospects varied across businesses and Districts. Based on discussions with District con- tacts as well as a survey of firms’ chief financial officers, some participants commented that while businesses were generally optimistic about their own prospects, they expressed increasing concern about the general eco- nomic outlook for 2023. Participants noted signs of continued easing in supply bottlenecks, with a couple cit- ing District contacts’ reports of declines in shipping costs and delivery times. Even so, participants remarked that the improvements in supply chains had not been uniform and supply shortages remained for some types of goods. Participants also discussed the developments Minutes of the Meeting of December 13–14, 2022Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ in energy and agricultural sectors. Several participants commented that they saw diminished risks of severe dis- ruption from the European Union’s embargo and the Group of Seven’s price cap on Russian oil exports. A couple of participants noted that high costs for inputs like diesel, feed, and fertilizer were creating challenges for the agricultural sector. Participants observed that the labor market had re- mained very tight, with the unemployment rate near a historically low level, robust payroll gains, a high level of job vacancies, and elevated nominal wage growth. Sev- eral participants commented that there were tentative signs of labor market imbalances improving, including declines in job openings and quits over the second half of 2022 as well as reports from District contacts that they were seeing more qualified job applicants for open positions than earlier in the year. Some participants pointed out that payroll gains had remained robust even as they slowed in recent months. Nevertheless, they noted that some other measures of employment—such as those based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ house- hold survey and the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages—suggested that job growth in 2022 may have been weaker than indicated by payroll employment. Participants generally concluded that there remained a large imbalance between labor supply and labor demand, as indicated by the still-large number of job openings and elevated nominal wage growth. Participants com- mented that labor demand had remained strong to date despite the slowdown in economic growth, with a few remarking that some business contacts reported that they would be keen to retain workers even in the face of slowing demand for output because of their recent ex- periences of labor shortages and hiring challenges. With the labor force participation rate little changed since the beginning of 2022, some participants commented that labor supply appeared to be constrained by structural factors such as early retirements, reduced availability or increased cost of childcare, more costly transportation, and reduced immigration. Under an appropriately re- strictive path of monetary policy, participants expected labor market supply and demand to come into better bal- ance over time, easing upward pressures on nominal wages and prices. In the context of achieving the Com- mittee’s broad-based and inclusive maximum-employ- ment goal, a number of participants commented that as the labor market moved into better balance, the unem- ployment rate for some demographic groups—particu- larly African Americans and Hispanics—would likely in- crease by more than the national average. With inflation still well above the Committee’s longer- run goal of 2 percent, participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high. Participants concurred that the inflation data received for October and November showed welcome reductions in the monthly pace of price increases, but they stressed that it would take sub- stantially more evidence of progress to be confident that inflation was on a sustained downward path. Partici- pants noted that core goods prices declined in the Octo- ber and November CPI data, consistent with easing sup- ply bottlenecks. Some participants also noted that, by some measures, firms’ markups were still elevated and that a continued subdued expansion in aggregate de- mand would likely be needed to reduce remaining up- ward pressure on inflation. Regarding housing services inflation, many participants observed that measures of rent based on new leases were indicating a deceleration, which would be reflected in the measures of shelter in- flation with some lag. Participants noted that, in the lat- est inflation data, the pace of increase for prices of core services excluding shelter—which represents the largest component of core PCE price inflation—was high. They also remarked that this component of inflation has tended to be closely linked to nominal wage growth and therefore would likely remain persistently elevated if the labor market remained very tight. Consequently, while there were few signs of adverse wage-price dynamics at present, they assessed that bringing down this compo- nent of inflation to mandate-consistent levels would re- quire some softening in the growth of labor demand to bring the labor market back into better balance. Participants observed that measures from surveys of households and businesses as well as from financial mar- kets generally indicated that longer-term inflation expec- tations remained well anchored, while short-term infla- tion expectations had come down. However, partici- pants stressed that the Committee’s ongoing monetary policy tightening to achieve a stance that will be suffi- ciently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent is es- sential for ensuring that longer-term expectations re- main well anchored. Several participants commented that the longer inflation remained well above the 2 per- cent goal, the greater the risk that longer-term inflation expectations could become unanchored. Such a devel- opment, if it materialized, would make it much more costly to bring inflation down to achieve the Commit- tee’s statutory objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Participants noted that since the November meeting, fi- nancial conditions had eased, with the market-implied path for the federal funds rate beyond 2023 and longer- Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ term yields coming down noticeably. A few participants remarked that the current configuration of nominal yields, with longer-term yields lower than shorter-term yields, had historically preceded recessions and hence bore watching. However, a couple of them also noted that the current inversion of the yield curve could reflect, in part, that investors expect the nominal policy rate to decline because of a fall in inflation over time. Participants generally noted that the uncertainty associ- ated with their economic outlooks was high and that the risks to the inflation outlook remained tilted to the up- side. Participants cited the possibility that price pres- sures could prove to be more persistent than anticipated, due to, for example, the labor market staying tight for longer than anticipated. Participants saw a number of uncertainties surrounding the outlook for inflation stem- ming from factors abroad, such as China’s relaxation of its zero-COVID policies, Russia’s continuing war against Ukraine, and effects of synchronous policy firm- ing by major central banks. A number of participants judged that the risks to the outlook for economic activity were weighted to the downside. They noted that sources of such risks included the potential for more persistent inflation inducing more restrictive policy responses, the prospect of unexpected negative shocks tipping the economy into a recession in an environment of subdued growth, and the possibility of households’ and busi- nesses’ concerns about the outlook restraining their spending sufficiently to reduce aggregate output. In their consideration of appropriate monetary policy ac- tions at this meeting, participants concurred that the Committee had made significant progress over the past year in moving toward a sufficiently restrictive stance of monetary policy. Even so, participants agreed that infla- tion remained well above the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent, while the labor market remained very tight, contributing to upward pressures on wages and prices. Against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting and to continue the process of reducing the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that the Commit- tee issued in May. Participants observed that a slowing in the pace of rate increases at this meeting would better allow the Committee to assess the economy’s progress toward the Committee’s goals of maximum employment and price stability, as monetary policy approached a stance that was sufficiently restrictive to achieve these goals. In discussing the policy outlook, participants continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate to achieve the Committee’s objectives. In determining the pace of future increases in the target range, participants judged that it would be appropriate to take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. With inflation staying persistently above the Commit- tee’s 2 percent goal and the labor market remaining very tight, all participants had raised their assessment of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate relative to their assessment at the time of the September meeting. No participants anticipated that it would be appropriate to begin reducing the federal funds rate target in 2023. Par- ticipants generally observed that a restrictive policy stance would need to be maintained until the incoming data provided confidence that inflation was on a sus- tained downward path to 2 percent, which was likely to take some time. In view of the persistent and unaccept- ably high level of inflation, several participants com- mented that historical experience cautioned against prematurely loosening monetary policy. In light of the heightened uncertainty regarding the out- looks for both inflation and real economic activity, most participants emphasized the need to retain flexibility and optionality when moving policy to a more restrictive stance. Participants generally noted that the Commit- tee’s future decisions regarding policy would continue to be informed by the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, and that the Committee would continue to make decisions meeting by meeting. Participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to re- turning inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. A number of participants emphasized that it would be important to clearly communicate that a slowing in the pace of rate increases was not an indication of any weak- ening of the Committee’s resolve to achieve its price- stability goal or a judgment that inflation was already on a persistent downward path. Participants noted that, be- cause monetary policy worked importantly through fi- nancial markets, an unwarranted easing in financial con- ditions, especially if driven by a misperception by the public of the Committee’s reaction function, would complicate the Committee’s effort to restore price sta- bility. Several participants commented that the medians of participants’ assessments for the appropriate path of the federal funds rate in the Summary of Economic Pro- jections, which tracked notably above market-based Minutes of the Meeting of December 13–14, 2022Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ measures of policy rate expectations, underscored the Committee’s strong commitment to returning inflation to its 2 percent goal. Participants discussed a number of risk-management considerations related to the conduct of monetary pol- icy. Many participants highlighted that the Committee needed to continue to balance two risks. One risk was that an insufficiently restrictive monetary policy could cause inflation to remain above the Committee’s target for longer than anticipated, leading to unanchored infla- tion expectations and eroding the purchasing power of households, especially for those already facing difficulty making ends meet. The other risk was that the lagged cumulative effect of policy tightening could end up be- ing more restrictive than is necessary to bring down in- flation to 2 percent and lead to an unnecessary reduction in economic activity, potentially placing the largest bur- dens on the most vulnerable groups of the population. Participants generally indicated that upside risks to the inflation outlook remained a key factor shaping the out- look for policy. A couple of participants noted that risks to the inflation outlook were becoming more balanced. Participants generally observed that maintaining a re- strictive policy stance for a sustained period until infla- tion is clearly on a path toward 2 percent is appropriate from a risk-management perspective. Committee Policy Action In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators pointed to mod- est growth in spending and production. Members also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Members agreed that inflation had remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Members observed that Russia’s war against Ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. They also agreed that the war and related events were contributing to upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. Members con- curred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. Members agreed that the Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 per- cent over the longer run. In support of these goals, members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4¼ to 4½ percent. Members anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be ap- propriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 per- cent over time. Members agreed that, in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, they would take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects eco- nomic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. In addition, members agreed that they would continue reducing the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mort- gage-backed securities, as described in the Plans for Re- ducing the Size of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet that were issued in May. All members affirmed that the Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. They would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Mem- bers agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on pub- lic health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and interna- tional developments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- lowing domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective December 15, 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 4¼ to 4½ percent. • Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 4.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate opera- tion limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 4.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ • Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are the monthly cap. than less • Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate has remained low. Inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbal- ances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Russia’s war against Ukraine is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship. The war and related events are contributing to upward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. The Committee is highly at- tentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4¼ to 4½ percent. The Committee anticipates that ongoing in- creases in the target range will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. In determining the pace of future increases in the target range, the Com- mittee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial devel- opments. In addition, the Committee will con- tinue reducing its holdings of Treasury securi- ties and agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Bal- ance Sheet that were issued in May. The Com- mittee is strongly committed to returning infla- tion to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international de- velopments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michael S. Barr, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Susan M. Collins, Lisa D. Cook, Esther L. George, Philip N. Jefferson, Loretta J. Mester, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 4.4 per- cent, effective December 15, 2022. The Board of Gov- ernors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to approve a ½ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 4.5 percent, effective December 15, 2022.5 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 31– 5 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleve- land, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. Minutes of the Meeting of December 13–14, 2022Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ February 1, 2023. The meeting adjourned at 10:35 a.m. on December 14, 2022. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on November 22, 2022, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on November 1–2, 2022. _______________________ James A. Clouse Secretary Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 



Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee January 31–February 1, 2023 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, January 31, 2023, at 10:00 a.m. and contin- ued on Wednesday, February 1, 2023, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michael S. Barr Michelle W. Bowman Lael Brainard Lisa D. Cook Austan D. Goolsbee Patrick Harker Philip N. Jefferson Neel Kashkari Lorie K. Logan Christopher J. Waller Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Loretta J. Mester, and Helen E. Mucciolo, Alternate Members of the Committee James Bullard and Susan M. Collins, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston, respectively Kelly J. Dubbert, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Joshua Gallin, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Richard Ostrander, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Roc Armenter, James A. Clouse, Brian M. Doyle, Eric M. Engen, Anna Paulson, Andrea Raffo, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Patricia Zobel, Manager pro tem, System Open Market Account Stephanie R. Aaronson, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board Isaiah C. Ahn, Information Management Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Alyssa Arute,2 Manager, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Kartik B. Athreya, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Penelope A. Beattie, Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board Travis J. Berge, Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board David Bowman, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Isabel Cairó, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Prabal Chakrabarti, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Kathryn B. Chen, Director of Cross Portfolio Policy & Analysis, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Laura Choi, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Stephanie E. Curcuru, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of the economic and finan- cial situation. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Marnie Gillis DeBoer, Senior Associate Director, Kurt F. Lewis,2 Special Adviser to the Board, Division Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Board Members, Board Navtej S. Dhillon, Special Adviser to the Board, Laura Lipscomb, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Division of Board Members, Board Burcu Duygan-Bump, Special Adviser to the Board, Francesca Loria, Senior Economist, Division of Division of Board Members, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Andrew Meldrum, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Charles A. Fleischman, Adviser, Division of Research Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, and Statistics, Board Board Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Michelle M. Neal, Head of Markets, Federal Reserve Research and Statistics, Board Bank of New York Carlos Garriga, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Giovanni Olivei, Senior Vice President, Federal Bank of St. Louis Reserve Bank of Boston Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision Ander Perez-Orive, Principal Economist, Division of and Regulation, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Christine Graham, Deputy Associate Director, Division Nellisha D. Ramdass, Deputy Director, Division of of Supervision and Regulation, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Joseph W. Gruber, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Julie Ann Remache, Head of Cross Market & Portfolio Analysis, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Board Members, Board Jane E. Ihrig, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Zina Bushra Saijid, Senior Financial Analyst, Division Board Members, Board of International Finance, Board Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Zack Saravay, Financial Institution and Policy Analyst, Financial Stability, Board Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Anna Kovner, Director of Financial Stability Policy Research, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Director, Division Chiara Scotti, Deputy Associate Director, Division of of Research and Statistics, Board Financial Stability, Board Sylvain Leduc, Director of Research, Federal Reserve Nitish Ranjan Sinha, Special Adviser to the Board, Bank of San Francisco Division of Board Members, Board Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Ellis W. Tallman, Executive Vice President, Federal Stability, Board Reserve Bank of Cleveland Karen Leone de Nie, Vice President, Reserve Bank of Manjola Tase, Principal Economist, Division of Atlanta Monetary Affairs, Board Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Alene G. Tchourumoff, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Clara Vega, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Min Wei, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jonathan Willis, Vice President and Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Paul R. Wood, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rebecca Zarutskie, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Annual Organizational Matters3 The agenda for this meeting reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate mem- bers of the Federal Open Market Committee for a term beginning January 31, 2023, were received and that these individuals executed their oaths of office. The elected members and alternate members were as fol- lows: John C. Williams, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, with Helen E. Mucciolo, Interim First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as alternate Patrick Harker, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, with Thomas I. Barkin, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate Austan D. Goolsbee, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with Loretta J. Mester, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate Lorie K. Logan, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, with Raphael W. Bostic, President of the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate Neel Kashkari, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, with Mary C. Daly, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate. By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Com- mittee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2024: Chair Vice Chair Secretary Deputy Secretary Assistant Secretary Assistant Secretary Jerome H. Powell John C. Williams Joshua Gallin Matthew M. Luecke Brian J. Bonis Michelle A. Smith Mark E. Van Der Weide General Counsel Richard Ostrander Charles C. Gray Trevor A. Reeve Stacey Tevlin Beth Anne Wilson Deputy General Counsel Assistant General Counsel Economist Economist Economist Shaghil Ahmed Roc Armenter James A. Clouse Brian M. Doyle Eric M. Engen Beverly J. Hirtle Anna Paulson Andrea Raffo Chiara Scotti4 William Wascher Associate Economists By unanimous vote, the Committee selected the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to execute transactions for the System Open Market Account (SOMA). By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Patricia Zo- bel to serve at the pleasure of the Committee as deputy manager of the SOMA through February 20, 2023, and Roberto Perli and Julie Ann Remache to serve at the pleasure of the Committee as manager and deputy man- ager of the SOMA, respectively, effective February 21, 2023, on the understanding that these selections were subject to being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Secretary’s note: The Federal Reserve Bank of New York subsequently sent advice that the se- lections indicated previously were satisfactory. 3 Committee organizational documents are available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rules_authoriza- tions.htm. 4 Chiara Scotti’s selection was set to be effective upon her em- ployment with the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 31–February 1, 2023Page 3 As part of the annual review of the Committee’s govern- ance documents for open market operations and foreign currency transactions, the Committee unanimously ap- proved a new governance document titled “FOMC Au- thorizations and Continuing Directives for Open Market Operations.”3 The new document includes (1) authori- zations previously in the Committee’s Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations and Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations; (2) a new “Contin- uing Directive for Domestic Open Market Operations,” which combines direction to the Desk in the Standing Repurchase Agreement Facility and FIMA Repurchase Agreement Facility resolutions with direction to the Desk to continue to carry out other ongoing activities; (3) the Foreign Currency Directive; and (4) two other existing documents related to contingency arrange- ments. The new unified document improves clarity and transparency in the governance of Desk activities but does not make substantive changes to governance. The domestic policy directive released after each FOMC meeting will have modest conforming changes going forward. Ahead of the vote on policies relating to information se- curity, external communications, and investment and trading, the Chair commented on the critical importance of maintaining the public’s trust and confidence in the Federal Reserve as an institution and indicated that these policies were very important in that regard. All partici- pants indicated support for, and agreed to abide by the requirements of, the Program for Security of FOMC In- formation (Program), the FOMC Policy on External Communications of Committee Participants, the FOMC Policy on External Communications of Federal Reserve System Staff, and the Investment and Trading Policy for FOMC Officials. The Committee voted unanimously to reaffirm all four policies without revision.3 As part of the Committee’s annual organizational review process, all participants indicated support for the State- ment on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strat- egy, and the Committee voted unanimously to reaffirm it without revision.3 Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager pro tem turned first to a review of U.S. financial market developments. Market participants generally expected U.S. economic growth to moderate this year, although there was a wide dispersion in views about the extent of a potential slowdown. Market par- ticipants interpreted incoming data as pointing to mod- erating inflation risks. Against this backdrop, market participants judged that the FOMC would likely slow the pace of rate increases further at the current meeting, and respondents to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants widely expected the Committee to implement a ¼ percentage point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate. Survey re- spondents assessed that uncertainty around the likely peak level of the policy rate narrowed relative to the comparable results from the December surveys and, on average, placed significant probability on a target federal funds rate range close to 5 percent. A significant share of survey respondents anticipated that the Committee would hold the policy rate stable for much of 2023. Moderating inflation in the United States and improving global growth prospects lifted market sentiment. While most Desk survey respondents expected subdued growth or a mild recession in 2023, market participants continued to see notable uncertainties ahead, including prospects for a deeper downturn or the potential for more persistent inflation. Regarding the international outlook, signs of a faster re- opening in China and a less severe downturn in Europe eased concerns about global growth, contributing to a depreciation in the exchange value of the dollar and sup- porting optimism about emerging market economies. Narrowing interest rate differentials between the United States and other advanced foreign economies also con- tributed to dollar depreciation, as some foreign central bank communications suggested a need for further mon- etary policy tightening to address inflation pressures. In addition, the Bank of Japan unexpectedly widened its yield curve control band at its December meeting to ad- dress market functioning issues in the market for Japa- nese government bonds. Over the period, some other central banks communicated that they were at or near a point where it would be appropriate to pause policy rate increases and assess the effects of cumulative policy tightening. The manager pro tem turned next to a discussion of money markets and Federal Reserve operations. Money market rates were stable over the period, with the year- end passing smoothly. As expected, balances in the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) fa- cility increased at year-end but quickly retraced. Market participants generally expected usage of the ON RRP fa- cility to continue a downward trend in 2023, moderating the decline in reserve balances as the Federal Reserve’s holdings of securities continue to run off. Should tran- sitory pressures occur in money markets over the course of the year, the manager pro tem noted that the standing Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ repurchase agreement (repo) facility and discount win- dow would be available to help support effective mone- tary policy implementation. The manager noted that, over coming months, develop- ments affecting the Treasury General Account (TGA) and Treasury financing could influence money market conditions. An increase in TGA balances associated with April individual tax receipts could result in a tem- porary decline in reserve balances. In subsequent months, uncertainties associated with the debt limit could also be important. In particular, the Treasury could increase bill issuance to rebuild TGA balances once the debt limit is lifted, reducing reserves and po- tentially lifting money market rates. The manager pro tem noted that in recent months, investors in the ON RRP facility had responded to small increases in money market rates by shifting balances into private in- vestments, and that reductions in ON RRP volumes may help smooth adjustments in money markets. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the intermeeting period. the System’s account during Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the January 31– February 1 meeting indicated that labor market condi- tions remained tight in December, with the unemploy- ment rate at a historical low. Consumer price inflation— as measured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)—continued to step down in November and De- cember but was still elevated. Real gross domestic prod- uct (GDP) increased at a solid pace in the fourth quarter of last year. Total nonfarm payroll employment increased solidly in December, although at a slower pace than in the previ- ous two months. The unemployment rate moved back down to 3.5 percent in December. The unemployment rate for African Americans was unchanged, and the un- employment rate for Hispanics ticked up; the unemploy- ment rates for both groups remained above the aggre- gate measure. The aggregate measures of both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-popula- tion ratio edged up. The private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turn- over Survey, was flat in November and remained high. Measures of nominal wage growth slowed at the end of last year but continued to be elevated. The three-month change in the employment cost index (ECI) of hourly compensation in the private sector slowed to a 4.0 per- cent annual rate in December, while the three-month change measure of average hourly earnings (AHE) for all employees eased to an annual rate of 4.1 percent. Over the 12 months ending in December, the ECI in- creased 5.1 percent, and AHE rose 4.6 percent. Consumer price inflation eased in November and De- cember but remained elevated. Total PCE price infla- tion was 5.0 percent over the 12 months ending in De- cember, 1.1 percentage points lower than the October figure. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.4 percent over the 12 months ending in December, down 0.7 percentage point from its Octo- ber reading. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 4.4 percent in December, 0.3 per- centage point lower than in October. The latest survey- based readings on longer-term inflation expectations from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations remained within the range of their values reported in recent months, while near-term measures of inflation expectations from these surveys moved down along with actual inflation. Although real GDP expanded at an annual rate of 2.9 percent in the fourth quarter, real private domestic final purchases (PDFP)—which includes PCE, residen- tial investment, and business fixed investment—in- creased at a subdued annual rate of 0.2 percent. Real GDP growth was bolstered especially by a large gain in inventory investment and a notable contribution from net exports, as imports fell more than exports. Both in- ventories and net exports are volatile categories in aggre- gate spending. Regarding production, U.S. manufactur- ing output declined sizably in both November and De- cember. Foreign economic growth slowed in the fourth quarter, weighed down by the COVID-19-related slowdown in China and repercussions of Russia’s war against Ukraine. Weaker global demand and a rebalancing from goods to services also resulted in a pronounced slowdown in manufacturing, which weighed on activity in emerging Asia. In China, the pivot away from its zero-COVID policy appears to have resulted in a rapid surge in virus cases late in the year, but also in a rebound in activity as restrictions were rapidly removed. In Europe, the slow- down in economic growth was tempered by mild winter weather, which also prompted further declines in energy _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 31–February 1, 2023Page 5 prices. A decline in retail energy as well as food prices contributed to an easing in headline consumer price in- flation in many foreign economies. With core inflation remaining elevated amid tight labor markets, however, many central banks continued to tighten monetary pol- icy. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, the market-implied fed- eral funds rate path was little changed for 2023 but mod- erately moved down further out. Nominal Treasury yields were little changed, while swaps-based inflation compensation measures fell notably. Stock market in- dexes were slightly higher, and market volatility declined but remained slightly elevated. Businesses and house- holds continued to face elevated borrowing costs. Credit quality remained strong overall, although there were some signs of deterioration for consumer loans. The market-implied federal funds rate path for 2023 was little changed, on net, during the intermeeting period but fell moderately beyond mid-2024. On net, nominal Treasury yields were roughly unchanged, and swaps- market-implied inflation compensation measures fell notably. Broad stock price indexes ended the intermeeting period only slightly higher despite sizable fluctuations. Equity prices fell sharply following the December FOMC state- ment but recovered over the remainder of the period in response to data releases. The VIX—the one-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—decreased somewhat but remained slightly above the median range of its historical distribution. Spreads on investment- grade and high-yield corporate bonds narrowed some- what, on net, over the intermeeting period, while spreads on municipal bonds narrowed substantially. Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta- ble over the intermeeting period, with the December in- crease in the target range for the federal funds rate and the associated increases in the Federal Reserve’s admin- istered rates passing through quickly to overnight money market rates. In secured markets, repo rates were roughly the same as the ON RRP offering rate but con- tinued to occasionally print slightly higher around days with Treasury bill and coupon settlements. Daily take- up in the ON RRP facility remained elevated, reflecting continued elevated assets under management (AUM) for money market mutual funds (MMFs), ongoing uncer- tainty around the policy path, and limited supply of al- ternative investments such as Treasury bills. Net yields on MMFs rose further over the intermeeting period, mostly passing through the increase in administered rates. Bank deposit rates gradually increased but contin- ued to lag cumulative increases in the federal funds rate. Over the intermeeting period, investor perceptions of an improved economic outlook in China and Europe con- tributed to increases in foreign risky asset prices and weighed on the exchange value of the dollar. Global eq- uity indexes rose, supported in part by lower European natural gas prices and China’s decision to abandon its zero-COVID policy. Sovereign yields increased notably in the euro area and Japan, reflecting more-restrictive- than-expected communications from the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan’s decision to widen its yield curve control target band, respectively. In con- trast, yields in other major advanced foreign economies were little changed on net. The staff’s broad dollar index declined over the intermeeting period, with larger de- clines against emerging market economy (EME) curren- cies amid significant inflows into EME-focused invest- ment funds in January on improved investor sentiment. Narrowing yield differentials between the United States and some advanced foreign economies also contributed to the depreciation of the dollar. In domestic credit markets, businesses and households continued to face elevated borrowing costs. Yields for corporate bonds declined, while borrowing costs for lev- eraged loans were little changed at elevated levels. Bank interest rates for commercial and industrial (C&I) loans continued to trend upward in the fourth quarter. Yields on municipal bonds declined during the intermeeting pe- riod but remained above their historical average. Resi- dential mortgage rates were little changed over the inter- meeting period and remained well above their levels in the previous tightening cycle, notwithstanding the de- cline from their peak in early November. Interest rates on existing credit cards continued to increase in recent months, and interest rates on new auto loans also rose through mid-January. Credit remained broadly available for businesses and households with strong credit quality but remained tight for lower-rated borrowers. Lending standards tightened further for bank-dependent borrowers. Issuance of cor- porate bonds was subdued in December before picking up somewhat in January. New launches of leveraged loans were notably subdued in December and January, likely reflecting soft investor demand and higher refer- ence rates on floating-rate loans. In the January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported hav- ing tightened C&I and commercial real estate (CRE) Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ lending standards over the previous three months. Al- though C&I loans at banks continued to expand through December, they decelerated relative to earlier in the year, in line with tighter lending standards and weaker demand for C&I loans over the fourth quarter. CRE loan growth on domestic banks’ balance sheets remained robust in the fourth quarter. Meanwhile, issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities remained slow in November and December, amid high base interest rates and spreads. Some tightening in lending conditions was also evident for small businesses, with the share of small firms reporting that it was more difficult to obtain credit compared with three months earlier continuing to trend up through December. Credit was broadly available in the residential mortgage market for high-credit-score borrowers who met stand- ard conforming loan criteria. Credit availability for households with lower credit scores was considerably tighter, though comparable to levels prevailing before the pandemic. Purchase mortgage applications and re- finance applications were both little changed over the in- termeeting period. Home equity line of credit (HELOC) balances at banks continued to grow through the fourth quarter, on net, potentially reflecting homeowners using HELOCs as a preferred way of extracting home equity in the presence of high current mortgage rates. In the January SLOOS, banks reported tighter standards for all consumer loans. Even so, total credit card balances in- creased at a solid pace in November, while auto loans grew modestly. Overall, credit quality remained strong, although there was some deterioration for credit card and auto loan borrowers and some predictors of future credit quality worsened a bit further. The volume of corporate bond rating downgrades outpaced upgrades in December, al- though the level of downgrades remained moderate. Leveraged loans experienced notable net rating down- grades in December, but the pace moderated in January. Default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans remained low. Measures of expected default probabili- ties for corporate bonds and leveraged loans remained elevated relative to their historical distributions. The credit quality of businesses that borrow from banks re- mained sound, on balance, although, in the January SLOOS, banks reported expecting a deterioration in the quality of business loans in their portfolio over 2023. Delinquencies on small business loans continued to edge up in November but remained low relative to historical levels. The credit quality of households also remained strong, on balance, despite some signs of deterioration. Delin- quencies for Federal Housing Administration mortgages increased slightly, but overall mortgage delinquency rates were still near pre-pandemic lows. Delinquency rates for credit cards and auto loans continued to rise during the third quarter. While delinquency rates on credit cards were still relatively low, those on auto loans rose above pre-pandemic levels. In the January SLOOS, banks reported expecting a further deterioration in the quality of household loans in 2023, especially for con- sumer loans. The staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, charac- terized the financial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as moderate. The staff judged that asset valua- tion pressures remained notable. In particular, the staff noted that measures of valuations in both residential and commercial property markets remained high, and that the potential for large declines in property prices re- mained greater than usual. In addition, the forward price-to-earnings ratio for S&P 500 firms remained above its median value despite the decline in equity prices over the past year. The staff assessed that valua- tion pressures had eased for corporate bonds and lever- aged loans, as spreads in both markets had increased from recent lows. The staff assessed that vulnerabilities associated with household and business leverage remained moderate, noting that although measures of business leverage were at or near a historically high level, the ability of firms to service their debt has kept pace with rising debt loads and interest rates. Household borrowing rose for bor- rowers with prime credit scores but declined for house- holds with lower credit scores. Vulnerabilities associated with financial leverage also remained moderate. In par- ticular, risk-based capital ratios for banks increased slightly, a staff measure of leverage at life insurance com- panies remained relatively flat in recent quarters, and lev- erage among private credit funds has remained steady for several years. While measures of hedge fund leverage have decreased since the pandemic shock, the staff noted that leverage among the largest funds was on track to return to 2019 levels. Vulnerabilities associated with funding risks were char- acterized as moderate. The rising rate environment has prompted inflows into prime retail MMFs, while AUM at prime institutional funds, which have proved more sensitive to turmoil in the past, have grown much less. Assets in open-end mutual funds that invest in less liquid _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 31–February 1, 2023Page 7 instruments like bank loans or high-yield corporate bonds have declined notably over the past year. In re- sponse to vulnerabilities at MMFs and open-end mutual funds, the Securities and Exchange Commission has proposed rules to make these funds more resilient. Staff Economic Outlook The forecast for the U.S. economy prepared by the staff for this FOMC meeting had a somewhat higher path for the level of real GDP and a modestly lower path for the unemployment rate than in the December projection, re- flecting both the recent data and a small additional boost to output from a lower projected path for the dollar. Al- though recent data indicated that real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2022 was stronger than expected, real PDFP growth was weaker than previously forecast, and the large, unexpected boost to GDP growth from inventory investment was not projected to persist. In part reflecting the lagged effects of previous monetary policy tightening, the staff still projected real GDP growth to slow markedly this year and the labor market to soften. The staff forecast continued to include a pickup in real GDP growth starting next year, although projected output growth in 2024 and 2025 remains be- low the staff’s estimate of potential output growth. The level of real output was expected to move down to the staff’s estimate of potential near the end of 2025. Like- wise, the unemployment rate was projected to gradually move up to the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at the end of 2025. On a four-quarter change basis, total PCE price inflation was forecast to be 2.8 percent in 2023, and core inflation was expected to be 3.2 percent, both lower than in the December projection. With the effects of supply–de- mand imbalances in goods markets expected to further unwind and labor and product markets projected to be- come less tight, the staff continued to forecast that infla- tion would decline further over 2024 and 2025. On a four-quarter change basis, core goods inflation was pro- jected to move down further this year and then remain subdued, housing services inflation was expected to peak later this year and then move down, and core nonhous- ing services inflation was forecast to slow as nominal wage growth eased. With steep declines in consumer energy prices and a substantial moderation in food price inflation expected for this year, total inflation was pro- jected to step down markedly this year and then to track core inflation over the following two years. In 2025, both total and core PCE price inflation were expected to be near 2 percent. The sluggish growth in real private domestic spending expected this year and the persistently tight financial conditions were seen as tilting the risks to the downside around the baseline projection for real economic activ- ity, and the staff still viewed the possibility of a recession sometime this year as a plausible alternative to the base- line. Moreover, with core PCE price inflation having slowed in recent months, along with the cumulative up- ward revisions to the core inflation projection over the past year and the expected softening in economic growth, the staff now viewed the risks around the base- line forecast for inflation this year as balanced. For be- yond this year, the staff continued to view the risks around the inflation projection as skewed to the upside, reflecting concerns about the potential persistence of in- flation. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that recent indicators pointed to modest growth in spending and production. Nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate remained low. Inflation had eased some- what but remained elevated. Participants recognized that Russia’s war against Ukraine was causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship and was contrib- uting to elevated global uncertainty. Against this back- ground, participants continued to be highly attentive to inflation risks. Participants agreed that cumulative policy firming to date had reduced demand in the most interest-rate-sen- sitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing. Par- ticipants observed that growth in economic activity in 2022 had been below its longer-run trend and expected that real GDP growth would slow further in 2023. While real GDP growth had rebounded in the second half of 2022, several participants noted that growth in PDFP had nearly stalled in the fourth quarter. With inflation remaining unacceptably high, participants expected that a period of below-trend growth in real GDP would be needed to bring aggregate demand into better balance with aggregate supply and thereby reduce inflationary pressures. Some participants judged that recent eco- nomic data signaled a somewhat higher chance of con- tinued subdued economic growth, with inflation falling over time to the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 per- cent, although some participants noted that the proba- bility of the economy entering a recession in 2023 re- mained elevated. Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ In their discussion of the household sector, participants observed that real consumer spending had declined in November and December—in part reflecting the tight- ening in financial conditions over the past year—and an- ticipated that consumption would likely grow at a sub- dued rate in 2023. Participants noted that excess savings accumulated during the pandemic had continued to sup- port consumption, although several participants re- marked that the importance of this factor would likely wane over time as excess savings continued to be drawn down or eroded by inflation. A couple of participants observed that some consumers were shifting their spending to less expensive alternatives. A few partici- pants noted the effects of higher interest costs in re- straining consumption or inhibiting the ability of some households to repay their loans, while a couple of par- ticipants noted that inflation was eroding households’ purchasing power. However, a couple of participants noted that some states could return part of their sizable budget surpluses to households through tax cuts or re- bates, which would provide support to consumption. Participants agreed that activity in the housing market had continued to weaken, largely reflecting the increase in mortgage rates over the past year. Regarding the business sector, participants observed that growth in business fixed investment spending had been subdued in the fourth quarter and was being restrained by past interest rate increases. A number of participants commented that supply bottlenecks continued to ease, although supply chain issues remained a challenge in some sectors. Several participants remarked that the re- cent strong growth in inventory investment will likely slow; a couple of those participants noted that busi- nesses appeared more confident that significant supply bottlenecks would not reemerge and might therefore choose to hold smaller inventories. Some participants commented that the easing of COVID-related lockdown restrictions in China or stronger-than-expected growth in economic activity in the euro area could provide sup- port to final demand in the United States. Participants agreed that the labor market remained very tight and assessed that labor demand substantially ex- ceeded the supply of available workers. Participants noted that the unemployment rate had returned to a his- torically low level in December, job vacancies remained high, and wage growth remained elevated. Several par- ticipants noted that recent reductions in the workforces of some large technology businesses followed much larger increases over the previous few years and judged that these reductions did not appear to reflect wide- spread weakness in the demand for labor. A few partic- ipants remarked that some business contacts appeared keen to retain workers even in the face of slowing de- mand for output because of their recent experiences of labor shortages and hiring challenges. Participants agreed that labor supply remained constrained by struc- tural factors such as the effects from the pandemic, in- cluding those on early retirements, and the reduced avail- ability and increased cost of childcare. Nevertheless, participants noted tentative signs that imbalances be- tween demand and supply in the labor market were im- proving, with job vacancies and payroll gains declining somewhat from high levels, the average number of hours worked falling, and growth in wages and employ- ment costs slowing. Some participants commented on the recent reduction in temporary employment, which previously had often preceded more widespread reduc- tions in labor demand. Under appropriate monetary policy, participants expected labor market demand and supply to come into better balance over time, easing up- ward pressure on nominal wages and prices. A number of participants commented on the importance of recog- nizing that, to the extent national unemployment in- creases, historical evidence indicates that even larger in- creases in the unemployment rate for some demographic groups—particularly African Americans and Hispan- ics—would be likely to occur. With inflation still well above the Committee’s longer- run goal of 2 percent, participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high. A number of participants com- mented that the costs of elevated inflation are particu- larly high for lower-income households. Participants noted that inflation data received over the past three months showed a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of price increases but stressed that substantially more evidence of progress across a broader range of prices would be required to be confident that inflation was on a sustained downward path. Participants noted that core goods prices had declined notably over the pre- vious few months as supply bottlenecks had eased but anticipated that price declines for this component would dissipate as the downward pressure on goods prices from resolving supply bottlenecks fades. Participants judged that housing services inflation would likely begin to fall later this year, reflecting continued smaller in- creases, or potentially declines, in rents on new leases. Participants agreed that they had observed less evidence of a slowdown in the rate of increase of prices for core services excluding housing, a category that accounts for more than half of the core PCE price index. Participants judged that as long as the labor market remained very _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 31–February 1, 2023Page 9 tight, wage growth in excess of 2 percent inflation and trend productivity growth would likely continue to put upward pressure on some prices in this component. A couple of participants observed that changes in wages tend to lag changes in prices, which can complicate the assessment of inflation pressures. A couple of partici- pants remarked that the poor performance of labor productivity growth last year was restraining aggregate supply, which was contributing to imbalances between aggregate demand and aggregate supply and therefore to upward pressure on inflation. Several participants noted the possibility that as consumers become more price sensitive, businesses might accept lower profit margins in an effort to maintain market share, which could re- duce inflation temporarily. Participants observed that indicators of short-term inflation expectations from sur- veys of households and businesses as well as from finan- cial markets had come down and that longer-term infla- tion expectations remained well anchored. A number of participants noted the importance of longer-term infla- tion expectations remaining anchored and remarked that the longer inflation remained elevated, the greater the risk of inflation expectations becoming unanchored. In that adverse scenario, it would be more costly to bring inflation down to achieve the Committee’s statutory ob- jectives of maximum employment and price stability. Participants observed that financial conditions remained much tighter than in early 2022. However, several par- ticipants observed that some measures of financial con- ditions had eased over the past few months. A few par- ticipants noted that increased confidence among market participants that inflation would fall quickly appeared to contribute to declines in market expectations of the fed- eral funds rate path beyond the near term. Participants noted that it was important that overall financial condi- tions be consistent with the degree of policy restraint that the Committee is putting into place in order to bring inflation back to the 2 percent goal. Participants observed that the uncertainty associated with their outlooks for economic activity, the labor mar- ket, and inflation was high. Regarding upside risks to inflation, participants cited a variety of factors, including the possibility that price pressures could prove to be more persistent than anticipated due to, for example, the labor market staying tight for longer than anticipated. Participants also saw a number of upside risks surround- ing the outlook for inflation stemming from factors abroad, such as China’s relaxation of its zero-COVID policies and Russia’s continuing war against Ukraine. However, a few participants remarked that the risks to their inflation outlook had become more balanced. Par- ticipants agreed that the risks to the outlook for eco- nomic activity were weighted to the downside. Partici- pants noted that sources of such risks included the pro- spect of unexpected negative shocks tipping the econ- omy into a recession in an environment of subdued growth, the effects of synchronous policy firming by ma- jor central banks, and disruptions in the financial system and broader economy associated with concerns that the statutory debt limit might not be raised in a timely man- ner. In their discussion of issues related to financial stability, several participants discussed vulnerabilities in the finan- cial system associated with higher interest rates, includ- ing the elevated valuations for some categories of assets, particularly in the CRE sector; the susceptibility of some nonbank financial institutions to runs; and the effect of large, unrealized losses on some banks’ securities port- folios. A few participants commented that international stresses had the potential to transmit to the U.S. financial system. A number of participants noted the importance of orderly functioning of the market for U.S. Treasury securities and stressed the importance of the appropriate authorities continuing to address issues related to the re- silience of the market. Although several participants noted that the Federal Reserve’s standing liquidity facil- ities could be helpful in addressing significant pressures in funding markets, should they arise, several partici- pants also noted the challenges of addressing potential disruptions in U.S. core market functioning. A few par- ticipants remarked that recent failures of companies in- volved in crypto finance have had a limited effect on the broader financial system. These participants indicated that this limited effect reflected the minimal extent of the crypto market’s connections to the banking system thus far, consistent with the risks associated with many of these activities. Several participants discussed the value of the Federal Reserve taking additional steps to understand the potential risks associated with climate change or to assess the materiality of such risks in the context of carrying out its responsibilities to evaluate risks in the banking system and broader financial system. A number of participants stressed that a drawn-out pe- riod of negotiations to raise the federal debt limit could pose significant risks to the financial system and the broader economy. In their consideration of appropriate monetary policy ac- tions at this meeting, participants concurred that the Committee had made significant progress over the past year in moving toward a sufficiently restrictive stance of monetary policy. Even so, participants agreed that, Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ while there were recent signs that the cumulative effect of the Committee’s tightening of the stance of monetary policy had begun to moderate inflationary pressures, in- flation remained well above the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent and the labor market remained very tight, contributing to continuing upward pressures on wages and prices. Against this backdrop, and in consid- eration of the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, almost all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting. Many of these participants observed that a further slow- ing in the pace of rate increases would better allow them to assess the economy’s progress toward the Commit- tee’s goals of maximum employment and price stability as they determine the extent of future policy tightening that will be required to attain a stance that is sufficiently restrictive to achieve these goals. A few participants stated that they favored raising the target range for the federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting or that they could have supported raising the target by that amount. The participants favoring a 50-basis point in- crease noted that a larger increase would more quickly bring the target range close to the levels they believed would achieve a sufficiently restrictive stance, taking into account their views of the risks to achieving price stabil- ity in a timely way. All participants agreed that it was appropriate to continue the process of reducing the Fed- eral Reserve’s securities holdings, as described in its pre- viously announced Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet. In discussing the policy outlook, with inflation still well above the Committee’s 2 percent goal and the labor market remaining very tight, all participants continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate to achieve the Committee’s objectives. Participants affirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the Com- mittee’s 2 percent objective. In determining the extent of future increases in the target range, participants judged that it would be appropriate to take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. Participants observed that a restrictive policy stance would need to be maintained until the incoming data provided confidence that inflation was on a sustained downward path to 2 percent, which was likely to take some time. Participants discussed the heightened uncertainty re- garding the economic outlook and a number of factors that could affect inflation and real economic activity. Participants generally noted that the Committee’s future decisions regarding policy would continue to be in- formed by the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. A num- ber of participants observed that financial conditions had eased in recent months, which some noted could necessitate a tighter stance of monetary policy. Participants also discussed a number of risk-manage- ment considerations related to the conduct of monetary policy. Almost all participants observed that slowing the pace of rate increases at the current juncture would allow for appropriate risk management as the Committee as- sessed the extent of further tightening needed to meet the Committee’s goals. Several of those participants ob- served that risks to the economic outlook were becom- ing more balanced. With inflation still well above the Committee’s longer-run goal, participants generally noted that upside risks to the inflation outlook remained a key factor shaping the policy outlook, and that main- taining a restrictive policy stance until inflation is clearly on a path toward 2 percent is appropriate from a risk- management perspective. A number of participants ob- served that a policy stance that proved to be insuffi- ciently restrictive could halt recent progress in moderat- ing inflationary pressures, leading inflation to remain above the Committee’s 2 percent objective for a longer period, and pose a risk of inflation expectations becom- ing unanchored. Participants noted that the runoff of the balance sheet had been proceeding smoothly. A few participants ob- served that money markets could experience some tem- porary pressures as reserves declined if use of the Fed- eral Reserve’s ON RRP facility continued to remain high. They noted, however, that such pressures, should they occur, would likely cause an upward re-pricing of private money-market rates that could encourage market participants to reduce their use of the facility. Committee Policy Actions In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators pointed to mod- est growth in spending and production. Members also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Members agreed that inflation had eased somewhat but remained elevated. Members concurred that Russia’s war against Ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship and was contributing to elevated global uncertainty. Members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 31–February 1, 2023Page 11 Members agreed that the Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 per- cent over the longer run. In support of these goals, members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4½ to 4¾ percent. Members anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be ap- propriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 per- cent over time. Members concurred that, in determining the extent of future increases in the target range, they would take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy af- fects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. In addition, members agreed that they would continue reducing the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. The Committee remained strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. They would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Mem- bers agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international develop- ments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective February 2, 2023, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 4½ to 4¾ percent. • Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 4.75 percent and with an aggregate opera- tion limit of $500 billion; the aggregate op- eration limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 4.55 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-coun- terparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the Chair. • Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are the monthly cap. than less • Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemploy- ment rate has remained low. Inflation has eased somewhat but remains elevated. Russia’s war against Ukraine is causing tremen- dous human and economic hardship and is con- tributing to elevated global uncertainty. The Committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4½ to 4¾ percent. The Committee anticipates that ongoing in- creases in the target range will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 2 percent over time. In determining the extent of future increases in the target range, the Com- mittee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial devel- opments. In addition, the Committee will con- tinue reducing its holdings of Treasury securi- ties and agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. The Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on labor market conditions, in- flation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” Harker, Philip N. Jefferson, Neel Kashkari, Lorie K. Logan, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 4.65 percent, effective February 2, 2023. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unani- mously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 4.75 percent, effective February 2, 2023.5 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, March 21– 22, 2023. The meeting adjourned at 10:20 a.m. on Feb- ruary 1, 2023. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on January 3, 2023, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on December 13–14, 2022. Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michael S. Barr, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Lisa D. Cook, Austan D. Goolsbee, Patrick _______________________ Joshua Gallin Secretary 5 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Rich- mond, Atlanta, Chicago, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Fran- cisco. The vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 4.75 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of February 2, 2023, or the date such Reserve Banks inform the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, St. Louis, and Minneapolis were informed of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 4.75 percent, effective February 2, 2023.) _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of January 31–February 1, 2023Page 13 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee March 21–22, 2023 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, March 21, 2023, at 10:00 a.m. and contin- ued on Wednesday, March 22, 2023, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michael S. Barr Michelle W. Bowman Lisa D. Cook Austan D. Goolsbee Patrick Harker Philip N. Jefferson Neel Kashkari Lorie K. Logan Christopher J. Waller Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Loretta J. Mester, and Sushmita Shukla,2 Alternate Members of the Committee James Bullard and Susan M. Collins, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston, respectively Roberto Perli, Manager, System Open Market Account Julie Ann Remache, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board David Altig, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Kartik B. Athreya, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Becky C. Bareford, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Penelope A. Beattie,5 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board Daniel O. Beltran, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board Jennifer J. Burns,5 Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board Mark A. Carlson, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Kelly J. Dubbert, Interim President of the Federal Todd E. Clark, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Reserve Bank of Kansas City Bank of Cleveland Joshua Gallin, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Richard Ostrander, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson,3 Economist Shaghil Ahmed,4 Roc Armenter, James A. Clouse, Brian M. Doyle, Andrea Raffo, Chiara Scotti, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Daniel Cooper, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Stephanie E. Curcuru, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board Wendy E. Dunn, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Burcu Duygan-Bump, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Elected as an Alternate by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, effective March 2, 2023. 3 Attended through the discussion of the economic and finan- cial situation. 4 Attended from the discussion of the economic and financial situation through the end of Wednesday’s session. 5 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Matthew J. Eichner,5 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Fernando M. Martin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Ozge Akinci Emekli, Economic Research Advisor, Thomas Mertens, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank Federal Reserve Bank of New York of San Francisco Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, of Board Members, Board Board Andrew Figura, Associate Director, Division of Giovanni Nicolò, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision Marcel A. Priebsch, Principal Economist, Division of and Regulation, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Christine Graham,5 Special Adviser to the Board, Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Division of Division of Board Members, Board Board Members, Board Joseph W. Gruber, Executive Vice President, Federal Achilles Sangster II, Senior Information Manager, Reserve Bank of Kansas City Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Krista Schwarz, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Jane E. Ihrig, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Nitish Ranjan Sinha, Special Adviser to the Board, Board Members, Board Division of Board Members, Board Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Yannick Timmer, Senior Economist, Division of Financial Stability, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Don H. Kim, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Clara Vega, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Affairs, Board Board Members, Board Spencer Krane, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, Senior Adviser, Division of Bank of Chicago Monetary Affairs, Board Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Jeffrey D. Walker,5 Associate Director, Division of Stability, Board Paul Lengermann, Assistant Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Research and Statistics, Board Min Wei, Senior Associate Director, Division of Kurt F. Lewis, Special Adviser to the Board, Division Monetary Affairs, Board of Board Members, Board Paul R. Wood, Special Adviser to the Board, Division Laura Lipscomb, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board David López-Salido, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Francesca Loria, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Byron Lutz, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Board Members, Board Rebecca Zarutskie, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Recent Developments in the Banking Sector Before turning to other agenda items, the Chair asked the Vice Chair for Supervision to provide an update on recent developments in the banking sector. The Vice Chair for Supervision described the developments, in- cluding those at Silicon Valley Bank, Signature Bank, and Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Credit Suisse. He also described actions taken by the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies in re- sponse. He noted that the U.S. banking system is sound and resilient. He also noted that he will be leading a re- view of the supervision and regulation of Silicon Valley Bank, and that the Federal Reserve System will apply what is learned from the review to strengthen its super- visory and regulatory practices as appropriate. Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a review of U.S. financial market developments over the intermeeting period. Early in the period, firmer-than-expected data and policy communications pushed interest rates higher and equity prices lower. Developments in the banking sector later in the period were met with sharp reductions in Treasury yields, particularly at shorter tenors. Treasury market li- quidity was poor and implied volatility was high, but the market remained functional amid substantial trading ac- tivity. Higher Treasury market volatility contributed to wider spreads for household and business borrowing. Financial conditions tightened considerably over the in- termeeting period as a whole. Market contacts observed that the recent developments in the banking system will likely result in a pullback in bank lending, which would not be reflected in most common financial conditions indexes. Following the banking-sector developments, equity prices for large U.S. banks underperformed the broad market; equity prices for U.S. regional banks gen- erally underperformed by relatively more. Regarding the outlook for inflation in the United States, market-based measures of inflation compensation over shorter horizons rose over the period, although com- pensation retraced a good portion of its increase later in the period as markets reacted to the developments in the inflation compensation banking sector. measures continued to indicate that longer-term infla- tion expectations remained well anchored. Measures of inflation expectations from the Open Market Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Partic- ipants moved higher at shorter horizons and were little changed at longer horizons. Forward Regarding the outlook for monetary policy, market- based measures of policy expectations suggested that the federal funds rate would reach a peak in May 2023 and that the target range would then move lower. However, the medians of respondents’ modal expectations of the federal funds rate from the Desk surveys did not show any declines in the target range through the end of 2023. Risk and liquidity premiums embedded in market prices may have driven a good part of the difference between survey and market measures. The median respondent expected the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) projections for the federal funds rate at the end of 2023 and 2024 to shift 25 basis points higher. However, in- formation gathered after the Desk surveys closed sug- gests that those expectations had declined some, to a level comparable with the December SEP. Survey re- sponses suggested only modest changes in expectations for balance sheet policy. The manager turned next to a discussion of operations and money markets. Federal funds volumes fell sharply for a few days late in the period as Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) sought to maintain liquidity in order to meet increased demand for advances by member banks. Money market rates remained broadly stable, and se- cured and unsecured money market rates, including the effective fed funds rate, traded well within the target range. Use of U.S. dollar liquidity swap lines with for- eign central banks had been minimal, indicating that market participants did not face significant difficulties in obtaining dollar funding from private sources. Borrowing from the new Bank Term Funding Program had been small relative to discount window borrowing, which had increased to record levels. Use of the over- night reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility fell, especially for money market mutual funds (MMFs), as the supply of short-term securities at attractive rates increased. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. inflation—as measured by Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the March 21– 22 meeting indicated that labor market conditions re- mained tight in January and February, with robust job gains and the unemployment rate near a historical low. the Consumer price 12-month percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)—was still elevated in January. Real gross domestic product (GDP) appeared to be expanding at a modest pace in the first quarter. Although financial market data had shown reactions to developments in the banking sector late in the intermeet- ing period, there were essentially no economic data avail- able that covered this period. Minutes of the Meeting of March 21–22, 2023Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Total nonfarm payroll employment increased at a faster monthly pace in January and February than in the fourth quarter of last year. The unemployment rate was little changed and stood at 3.6 percent in February. Over the past two months, the unemployment rate for African Americans was unchanged, on net, and the unemploy- ment rate for Hispanics moved up; the unemployment rates for both groups remained above the aggregate measure. The aggregate measures of both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to- population ratio increased slightly. The private-sector job openings rate in January—as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey—was little changed, on balance, since November and remained high. Recent indicators of nominal wage growth had slowed but continued to be elevated. In February, the 3-month change in average hourly earnings for all employees was at an annual rate of 3.6 percent, slower than its 12-month pace of 4.6 percent. Over the four quarters of 2022, total labor compensation per hour in the business sector—as measured by the Productivity and Costs data—increased 4.5 percent, below its pace in the previous year. Consumer price inflation remained elevated early in the year. Total PCE price inflation was 5.4 percent over the 12 months ending in January, and core PCE price infla- tion—which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices—was 4.7 per- cent. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 4.6 percent in January. In February, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 6.0 percent, and core CPI inflation was 5.5 percent. The CPI, along with data from the producer price index, pointed to some slowing in PCE price inflation in Feb- ruary. The latest survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the Survey of Professional Fore- casters, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations remained within the range of their values reported in recent months, while near-term measures of inflation expectations from these surveys moved down. Real GDP growth seemed to be expanding at a modest pace in the first quarter. Gains in consumer spending had picked up in recent months, but growth in business fixed investment was slowing and residential investment was continuing to decline. After contracting over the second half of last year, manufacturing output expanded moderately, on average, over January and February, but near-term indicators—such as national and regional in- dexes for new orders—pointed to softening factory out- put in the coming months. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit registered a record high in 2022. The trade deficit had been narrow- ing since March of last year but resumed widening in De- cember and January. Real goods imports rose in Decem- ber and January, led by increases in imports of consumer goods and automotive products. Real goods exports also increased, but by less than imports. Indicators suggested that foreign economic growth re- bounded in the first quarter of 2023 as China reopened rapidly from its COVID-19-related shutdowns and Eu- rope’s economy proved to be resilient to the energy price shock stemming from Russia’s war against Ukraine and benefited from a mild winter that reduced energy de- mand. Manufacturing activity in emerging Asia showed signs of a turnaround from its pronounced slowdown since mid-2022. The recent developments in the bank- ing sector led to some tightening of financial conditions abroad. Oil prices edged down despite China’s rapid re- opening and the implementation of the European Un- ion’s embargo on Russian refined oil products. Retail energy inflation continued to slow, contributing to an easing of headline consumer price inflation in many ad- vanced foreign economies (AFEs). In contrast, core in- flation has shown little sign of easing in most foreign economies amid tight labor markets. In response, many foreign central banks continued their monetary policy tightening, although some have either paused or indi- cated that a pause soon was possible, citing the im- portance of assessing the cumulative effects of past pol- icy rate increases. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the first several weeks of the intermeeting period, incoming economic data and FOMC communications appeared to refocus market participants on upside risks to inflation and policy rates, with the market-implied policy rate path steepening, nominal Treasury yields ris- ing, near-term inflation compensation measures increas- ing, and broad stock market price indexes declining. Fi- nancing conditions for businesses, households, and mu- nicipalities had tightened during this period and were moderately restrictive overall, as borrowing costs in- creased notably with the expected path of policy rates and Treasury yields and as some lenders appeared to tighten nonprice borrowing terms. Nonetheless, lending volumes were generally solid. Credit quality was strong Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ overall, although it had worsened a bit for some borrow- ers. Expectations for future credit quality continued to deteriorate in some markets. Pricing in financial markets changed notably in the latter part of the intermeeting period, amid developments in the banking sector. Treasury yields and policy rate ex- pectations moved down significantly, while broad stock price indexes rose somewhat. The market-implied pol- icy rate path shifted down sizably, with the federal funds rate expected to peak in May before decreasing after- ward. Further out, OIS (overnight index swap) quotes at the end of the intermeeting period indicated that the expected federal funds rate at year-end 2024 was 3.28 percent, about 50 basis points lower than before the closures of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank but somewhat higher than at the time of the February FOMC meeting. Treasury yields declined, especially at shorter maturities, reflecting downward revisions in pol- icy rate expectations and the effects of flight to safety. Inflation compensation declined, especially at short ma- turities, likely reflecting, in part, a relatively larger decline in risk premiums on nominal Treasury securities relative to Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities due to strong safe-haven demands. Late in the intermeeting period, U.S. bank stock prices declined notably. Regional banks with unusually large reliance on uninsured deposits and holdings of securities with significant unrealized mark-to-market losses expe- rienced larger declines in stock prices. Broad equity prices rose somewhat after the closures of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank, reportedly driven by inves- tors’ reassessment of the outlook for interest rates, and after the announcement that UBS had agreed to buy Credit Suisse. The VIX—the one-month option- implied volatility on the S&P 500—increased to about 26.5 percent following the closures of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank, but it subsequently declined to 21 percent—around the 70th percentile of its histori- cal distribution. Swaption-implied volatilities of short- term interest rates increased notably during this period, reflecting increased uncertainty about the interest rate outlook. Some of the pricing moves in asset markets may have been amplified by impaired liquidity condi- tions. Despite deteriorating liquidity conditions in Treasury, bond, and equity markets, market functioning remained orderly. Over the intermeeting period, foreign financial markets were volatile as investors’ focus shifted from resilience in economic activity and stubbornly high core inflation across advanced economies earlier in the period to stresses in the global banking sector more recently. Ear- lier in the period, yields and market-based measures of inflation expectations in the AFEs increased notably, driven by spillovers from U.S. Treasury yields as well as upside surprises in economic and inflation data for AFEs. Later in the period, developments in the banking sector led to large declines in advanced-economy yields, and, on net, AFE yields declined slightly. Additionally, for the intermeeting period overall, the staff’s dollar in- dex rose moderately, corporate and emerging market economy sovereign credit spreads widened, and foreign equity indexes generally moved lower, with bank equities falling notably. U.S. unsecured funding markets showed some signs of pressure later in the intermeeting period. Issuance of commercial paper (CP) and negotiable certificates of de- posit (NCDs) dropped a touch over the entire period, and the fraction of CP issuance with overnight maturi- ties increased but remained within normal ranges. Spreads of term CP and NCDs widened some, and spreads for issuers with lower credit ratings rose more, but other unsecured spreads remained within normal ranges. Prime MMFs experienced outflows, while gov- ernment MMFs had inflows. The effective federal funds rate was little changed after the closures of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank. Amid these developments, federal funds volumes ini- tially declined sharply as the FHLBs reduced their activ- ity in the federal funds market in order to meet increased demand for advances by member banks; market volume subsequently rebounded partially. Activity in the repur- chase agreement market was robust, and trading volume remained within recent ranges. ON RRP take-up re- mained within recent ranges as well. Borrowing costs for businesses, households, and munic- ipalities rose notably in the early part of the intermeeting period, mostly in line with increases in the federal funds rate and Treasury yields. Since the closures of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank, spreads on corporate bonds, municipal bonds, and leveraged loans rose, with speculative-grade corporate bond spreads registering the largest moves; spreads remained at moderate levels rela- tive to their historical distributions. Investment-grade corporate yields and municipal yields were down mod- erately, whereas speculative-grade corporate yields and leveraged loan yields were up modestly. Mortgage rates were unchanged amid an increase in mortgage-backed securities (MBS) spreads. Based on data that do not cover the period following the closures of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank, Minutes of the Meeting of March 21–22, 2023Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ nonprice terms and standards appeared to tighten some- what in a number of markets. Nevertheless, generally solid funding flows suggest that most firms and house- holds had remained broadly able to access funding. Data on credit conditions following the developments in the banking sector were limited. After the two bank clo- sures, issuance of municipal bond and leveraged loans was sluggish, and gross issuance of corporate bonds fell to near zero. Mortgage loans to households remained available. The credit quality of businesses and households was largely stable over the intermeeting period. However, measures of credit performance showed some signs of weakening. Leveraged loan credit quality deteriorated somewhat after the closures of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank. Credit quality for residential mortgages remained unchanged. Staff Economic Outlook For some time, the forecast for the U.S. economy pre- pared by the staff had featured subdued real GDP growth for this year and some softening in the labor market. Given their assessment of the potential eco- nomic effects of the recent banking-sector develop- ments, the staff’s projection at the time of the March meeting included a mild recession starting later this year, with a recovery over the subsequent two years. Real GDP growth in 2024 was projected to remain below the staff’s estimate of potential output growth, and then GDP growth in 2025 was expected to be above that of potential. Resource utilization in both product and labor markets was forecast to be much less tight than in the January projection. The level of real output was pro- jected to move below the staff’s estimate of potential output in early 2024, more than a year sooner than in the previous projection. Likewise, the unemployment rate was projected to rise above the staff’s estimate of its nat- ural rate early next year. On a four-quarter change basis, total PCE price inflation was forecast to be 2.8 percent this year, with core infla- tion at 3.5 percent. Core goods inflation was projected to move down further this year and then remain sub- dued; housing services inflation was expected to peak later this year and then move down, while core nonhous- ing services inflation was forecast to slow gradually as nominal wage growth eased further. Reflecting the ef- fects of less projected tightness in product and labor markets, core inflation was forecast to slow sharply next year. With steep declines in consumer energy prices and a substantial moderation in food price inflation expected for this year, total inflation was projected to step down markedly this year and then to track core inflation over the following two years. In 2024 and 2025, both total and core PCE price inflation were expected to be near 2 percent. The staff judged that the uncertainty around the baseline projection was much greater than at the time of the pre- vious forecast. In particular, the staff viewed the risks around the baseline projection as determined im- portantly by banking conditions and the implications for financial conditions. If the effects of the recent devel- opments in the banking sector on macroeconomic con- ditions were to abate quickly, then the risks around the baseline would be tilted to the upside for both economic activity and inflation. If banking and financial condi- tions and their effects on macroeconomic conditions were to deteriorate more than assumed in the baseline, then the risks around the baseline would be skewed to the downside for both economic activity and inflation, particularly because historical recessions related to finan- cial market problems tend to be more severe and persis- tent than average recessions. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2023 through 2025 and over the longer run. The projections were based on their individ- ual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, includ- ing the path of the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. An SEP was released to the public following the conclu- sion of the meeting. In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that recent indicators pointed to modest growth in spending and production. At the same time, though, participants noted that job gains had picked up in recent months and were running at a robust pace; the unemployment rate had remained low. Inflation re- mained elevated. Participants agreed that the U.S. bank- ing system remained sound and resilient. They com- mented that recent developments in the banking sector were likely to result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses and to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. Participants agreed that the extent of these effects was uncertain. Against this Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ background, participants continued to be highly atten- tive to inflation risks. In assessing the economic outlook, participants noted that since they met in February, data on inflation, em- ployment, and economic activity generally came in stronger than expected. They also noted, however, that the developments in the banking sector that had oc- curred late in the intermeeting period affected their views of the economic and policy outlook and the un- certainty surrounding that outlook. Based on incoming economic data, participants’ assessments of the effects of cumulative policy firming, and their initial views on the likely economic effect of the recent banking-sector developments, participants generally expected real GDP to grow this year at a pace well below its long-run trend rate. With inflation remaining unacceptably high, partic- ipants expected that a period of below-trend growth in real GDP would be needed to bring aggregate demand into better balance with aggregate supply and thereby re- duce inflationary pressures. Many participants remarked that the incoming data before the onset of the banking- sector stresses had led them to see the appropriate path for the federal funds rate as somewhat higher than their assessment at the time of the December meeting. After incorporating the banking-sector developments, partici- pants indicated that their policy rate projections were now about unchanged from December. Participants agreed that the actions taken so far by the Federal Reserve in coordination with other government agencies, as well as actions taken by foreign authorities to address banking and financial stresses outside the U.S., had helped calm conditions in the banking sector. Even with the actions, participants recognized that there was significant uncertainty as to how those conditions would evolve. Participants assessed that the develop- ments so far would likely lead to some weakening of credit conditions, as some banks were likely to tighten lending standards amid rising funding costs and in- creased concerns about liquidity. Participants noted that it was too early to assess with confidence the magnitude of the effect of a credit tightening on economic activity and inflation, and that it was important to continue to closely monitor developments and update assessments of the actual and expected effects of credit tightening. Several participants noted that regional and community banks, a small number of which had come under signif- icant stress, were important in small business and mid- dle-market lending and were providing critical and unique financial services to many communities and in- dustries. In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that incoming data on real consumer expenditures showed a pickup in spending in January and February. They attributed the pickup to strong job gains, rising real disposable income, and households continuing to run down excess savings accumulated during the pandemic. They also noted that an atypically warm start to this year, along with challenges in seasonally adjusting data, likely contributed to the pickup in the reported data. A few participants observed that credit card delinquencies, par- ticularly for lower-income households, had risen in the face of elevated inflation and higher nominal interest rates. Participants noted that recent developments in the banking sector and the associated rise in uncertainty would likely weigh on consumer sentiment and that in- creased caution on the part of consumers could restrain spending. A couple of participants observed that high- frequency measures of consumer sentiment had not yet shown a significant change following the recent devel- opments in the banking sector, although they also acknowledged that the situation was fluid. Regarding the business sector, participants observed that growth in business fixed investment was being re- strained by tighter financial conditions that reflected cu- mulative policy firming to date. Participants expected the likely tightening of credit conditions due to the re- cent developments in the banking sector to further weigh on investment spending. In addition, the bank- ing-sector developments could damp business confi- dence and increase firms’ caution, reducing their willing- ness to hire new workers. However, a few participants mentioned that their nonbank business contacts re- ported that the banking-sector developments so far had not resulted in significant changes in their hiring and capital spending plans or sales expectations, though their contacts also acknowledged increased uncertainties around their outlooks. Participants agreed that the labor market remained very tight. Job gains had picked up to a robust pace in Janu- ary and February, and the unemployment rate remained low. Participants noted some signs of improvement in the imbalances between demand and supply in the labor market, including further declines in the quits rate as well as an increase in the overall labor force participation rate and the return of the prime-age participation rate to pre- pandemic levels. Furthermore, participants observed that wage growth appeared to be slowing gradually amid this apparent easing in labor demand and increase in la- bor supply. However, participants assessed that labor demand continued to substantially exceed labor supply, and several participants pointed out that wage growth Minutes of the Meeting of March 21–22, 2023Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ was still well above the rates that would be consistent over the longer run with the 2 percent inflation objec- tive, given current estimates of trend productivity growth. Participants expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, supply and demand conditions in the labor market will come into better balance over time, easing upward pressures on wages and prices. With inflation still well above the Committee’s longer- run goal of 2 percent, participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high. Participants commented that re- cent inflation data indicated slower-than-expected pro- gress on disinflation. In particular, they noted that revi- sions to the price data had indicated less disinflation at the end of last year than had been previously reported and that inflation was still quite elevated. Participants noted that, on a 12-month basis, core goods price infla- tion declined as supply chains continued to improve, but the pace of the decline had slowed, highlighting the still uncertain nature of the disinflationary process. Partici- pants expected that housing services inflation would likely begin to slow in coming months, reflecting contin- ued smaller increases, or potentially declines, in rents on new leases. Regarding prices for core services excluding housing, participants agreed that there was little evidence pointing to disinflation in this component. Participants generally judged that some more easing in labor market tightness and slowing in nominal wage growth would be necessary for sustained disinflation. Additionally, partic- ipants observed that indicators of short-term inflation expectations from surveys of households and businesses had come down further, while longer-term inflation ex- pectations remained well anchored. Participants also discussed the potential effect on inflation of the devel- opments in the banking sector. They noted that a tight- ening of credit conditions was likely to weigh on aggre- gate demand, which in turn could help reduce inflation- ary pressures. However, participants observed that the size of such an effect was highly uncertain. Participants generally observed that the recent develop- ments in the banking sector had further increased the already-high level of uncertainty associated with their outlooks for economic activity, the labor market, and in- flation. Participants saw risks to economic activity as weighted to the downside. As a source of downside risk to activity, they noted the possibility that banks would reduce the supply of credit by more than expected, which could restrain economic activity significantly. Participants mentioned potential intensification of Rus- sia’s war against Ukraine as an additional source of downside risk to the economic outlook. Participants generally saw risks to inflation as weighted to the upside, though they also recognized some downside risks to in- flation. As a source of upside risk to inflation, partici- pants cited the possibility of more-persistent-than- anticipated price pressures, due to, for example, surpris- ingly resilient labor demand. As a source of downside risk to inflation, participants noted that if banks reduce the supply of credit by more than expected, the likely restraint on economic activity and hiring could put addi- tional downward pressure on inflation. In their consideration of appropriate monetary policy ac- tions at this meeting, participants concurred that infla- tion remained well above the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent and that the recent data on inflation provided few signs that inflation pressures were abating at a pace sufficient to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Participants also noted that recent developments in the banking sector would likely result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses and weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, though the ex- tent of these effects was highly uncertain. Against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 25 ba- sis points to 4¾ to 5 percent. All participants also agreed that it was appropriate to continue the process of reduc- ing the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, as de- scribed in its previously announced Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet. Several participants noted that, in their policy delibera- tions, they considered whether it would be appropriate to hold the target range steady at this meeting. They noted that doing so would allow more time to assess the financial and economic effects of recent banking-sector developments and of the cumulative tightening of mon- etary policy. However, these participants also observed that the actions taken by the Federal Reserve in coordi- nation with other government agencies helped calm con- ditions in the banking sector and lessen the near-term risks to economic activity and inflation. Consequently, these participants judged it appropriate to increase the target range 25 basis points because of elevated inflation, the strength of the recent economic data, and their com- mitment to bring inflation down to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal. Some participants noted that given persistently high in- flation and the strength of the recent economic data, they would have considered a 50 basis point increase in the target range to have been appropriate at this meeting in the absence of the recent developments in the banking sector. However, due to the potential for banking-sector developments to tighten financial conditions and to Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ weigh on economic activity and inflation, they judged it prudent to increase the target range by a smaller incre- ment at this meeting. These participants noted that do- ing so would also allow the Committee time to better assess the effects of banking-sector developments on credit conditions and the economy as the Committee moved toward a sufficiently restrictive stance of mone- tary policy. Participants observed that the actions taken by the Fed- eral Reserve in coordination with other government agencies in the days preceding the meeting had served to calm conditions in the banking sector. Participants noted that the most significant issues appeared to have been limited to a small number of banks with poor risk- management practices and that the banking system re- mained sound and resilient. Participants emphasized that the Federal Reserve should use its liquidity and lender-of-last-resort tools, as well as its microprudential and macroprudential regulatory and supervisory tools, to address stress in the banking sector and to mitigate fu- ture financial stability risks. Participants agreed that re- cent banking developments would factor into the Com- mittee’s monetary policy decisions to the extent that these developments affect the outlook for employment and inflation and the risks surrounding the outlook. Par- ticipants reaffirmed their strong commitment to return- ing inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. In discussing the policy outlook, participants observed that inflation remained much too high and that the labor market remained tight; as a result, they anticipated that some additional policy firming may be appropriate to at- tain a sufficiently restrictive policy stance to return infla- tion to 2 percent over time. Many participants noted that the likely effects of recent banking-sector develop- ments on economic activity and inflation had led them to lower their assessments of the federal funds rate target range that would be sufficiently restrictive compared with assessments based solely on the recent economic data. In determining the extent of future increases in the target range, participants judged that it would be appro- priate to take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy af- fects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. In light of the highly uncertain economic outlook, par- ticipants underscored the importance of closely moni- toring incoming information and assessing the implica- tions for future monetary policy decisions. Participants noted that it would be particularly important to review incoming information regarding changes in credit con- ditions and credit flows as well as broader changes in fi- nancial conditions and to assess the implications for eco- nomic activity, labor markets, and inflation. Several par- ticipants emphasized the need to retain flexibility and optionality in determining the appropriate stance of monetary policy given the highly uncertain economic outlook. Participants emphasized a number of risk-management considerations related to the conduct of monetary pol- icy. Some participants observed that downside risks to growth and upside risks to unemployment had increased because of the risk that banking-sector developments could lead to further tightening of credit conditions and weigh on economic activity. Some participants also noted that, with inflation still well above the Commit- tee’s longer-run goal and the recent economic data re- maining strong, upside risks to the inflation outlook re- mained a key factor shaping the policy outlook, and that maintaining a restrictive policy stance until inflation is clearly on a downward path toward 2 percent would be appropriate from a risk-management perspective. Sev- eral participants noted the importance of longer-term in- flation expectations remaining anchored and remarked that the longer inflation remained elevated, the greater the risk of inflation expectations becoming unanchored. Participants generally agreed on the importance of closely monitoring incoming information and its impli- cations for the economic outlook, and that they were prepared to adjust their views on the appropriate stance of monetary policy in response to the incoming data and emerging risks to the economic outlook. Committee Policy Actions In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators pointed to mod- est growth in spending and production. They also con- curred that job gains had picked up in recent months and were running at a robust pace, that the unemployment rate had remained low, and that inflation remains ele- vated. Members concurred that the U.S. banking system is sound and resilient. They also agreed that recent de- velopments were likely to result in tighter credit condi- tions for households and businesses and to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, but that the ex- tent of these effects was uncertain. Members also con- curred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. Members agreed that the Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 per- cent over the longer run. In support of these goals, Minutes of the Meeting of March 21–22, 2023Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4¾ to 5 percent. Members agreed that they would closely monitor incoming information and assess the implications for monetary policy. Given recent de- velopments, members anticipated that some additional policy firming may be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Members con- curred that, in determining the extent of future increases in the target range, they would take into account the cu- mulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and in- flation, and economic and financial developments. In addition, members agreed that they would continue re- ducing the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury secu- rities and agency debt and agency MBS, as described in its previously announced plans. All members affirmed that they remained strongly committed to returning in- flation to its 2 percent objective. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. They would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Mem- bers agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation ex- pectations, and financial and international develop- ments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective March 23, 2023, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 4¾ to 5 percent. • Conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5 percent and with an aggregate op- eration limit of $500 billion. • Conduct standing overnight reverse repur- chase agreement operations at an offering rate of 4.8 percent and with a per-counter- party limit of $160 billion per day. • Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are the monthly cap. than less • Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. Job gains have picked up in recent months and are running at a robust pace; the unemployment rate has re- mained low. Inflation remains elevated. The U.S. banking system is sound and resilient. Recent developments are likely to result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses and to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. The extent of these effects is uncertain. The Committee remains highly at- tentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4¾ to 5 percent. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information and assess the implications for monetary policy. The Committee anticipates that some additional policy firming may be ap- propriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return in- flation to 2 percent over time. In determining Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 4.9 per- cent, effective March 23, 2023. The Board of Gover- nors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 5 percent, effective March 23, 2023.6 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, May 2–3, 2023. The meeting adjourned at 10:15 a.m. on March 22, 2023. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on February 21, 2023, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on January 31–Febru- ary 1, 2023. _______________________ Joshua Gallin Secretary the extent of future increases in the target range, the Committee will take into account the cumu- lative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and finan- cial developments. In addition, the Committee will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mort- gage-backed securities, as described in its previ- ously announced plans. The Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on labor market conditions, in- flation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michael S. Barr, Michelle W. Bowman, Lisa D. Cook, Austan D. Goolsbee, Patrick Harker, Philip N. Jefferson, Neel Kashkari, Lorie K. Logan, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. 6 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Rich- mond, Atlanta, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. The vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 5 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of March 23, 2023, or the date such Reserve Banks inform the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Chi- cago, St. Louis, and Minneapolis were informed of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 5 percent, effective March 23, 2023.) Minutes of the Meeting of March 21–22, 2023Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee May 2–3, 2023 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, May 2, 2023, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, May 3, 2023, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michael S. Barr Michelle W. Bowman Lisa D. Cook Austan D. Goolsbee Patrick Harker Philip N. Jefferson Neel Kashkari Lorie K. Logan Christopher J. Waller Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, Loretta J. Mester, and Sushmita Shukla, Alternate Members of the Committee James Bullard and Susan M. Collins, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston, respectively Kelly J. Dubbert, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Joshua Gallin, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Richard Ostrander, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, James A. Clouse, Anna Paulson, Andrea Raffo, Chiara Scotti, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Roberto Perli, Manager, System Open Market Account Julie Ann Remache, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Stephanie R. Aaronson,2 Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board Andre Anderson, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Kartik B. Athreya, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Penelope A. Beattie,2 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board Daniel O. Beltran, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board Carol C. Bertaut, Senior Adviser, Division of International Finance, Board Mark A. Carlson,2 Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Michele Cavallo, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Juan C. Climent, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Stephanie E. Curcuru, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board Ahmet Degerli, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board John C. Driscoll,2 Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Wendy E. Dunn,2 Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Burcu Duygan-Bump, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended Tuesday’s session only. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Eric C. Engstrom, Associate Director, Division of Kurt F. Lewis, Special Adviser to the Board, Division Monetary Affairs, Board of Board Members, Board Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board Laura Lipscomb, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Giovanni Favara, Assistant Director, Division of David López-Salido, Senior Associate Director, Monetary Affairs, Board Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Kurt Lunsford, Senior Research Economist, Federal Research and Statistics, Board Reserve Bank of Cleveland Jennifer Gallagher, Assistant to the Board, Division of Patrick E. McCabe, Deputy Associate Director, Board Members, Board Division of Research and Statistics, Board Peter M. Garavuso, Senior Information Manager, Davide Melcangi, Research Economist, Federal Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Reserve Bank of New York Carlos Garriga, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Bank of St. Louis Board Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision David Na, Lead Financial Institution and Policy and Regulation, Board Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Christine Graham,2 Special Adviser to the Board, Makoto Nakajima, Vice President, Federal Reserve Division of Board Members, Board Bank of Philadelphia Joseph W. Gruber, Executive Vice President, Federal Michelle M. Neal, Head of Markets, Federal Reserve Reserve Bank of Kansas City Bank of New York Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Giovanni Olivei, Senior Vice President, Federal Monetary Affairs, Board Reserve Bank of Boston Jane E. Ihrig, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Ghada M. Ijam, System Chief Information Officer, Marcel A. Priebsch, Principal Economist, Division of Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Monetary Affairs, Board Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Nitish Ranjan Sinha, Special Adviser to the Board, Financial Stability, Board Division of Board Members, Board Kyungmin Kim, Senior Economist, Division of John J. Stevens, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Research and Statistics, Board David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Director, Division Paula Tkac, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve of Research and Statistics, Board Bank of Atlanta Sylvain Leduc, Director of Research, Federal Reserve Clara Vega, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Bank of San Francisco Board Members, Board 3 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jeffrey D. Walker,3 Associate Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Min Wei,2 Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Paul R. Wood, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rebecca Zarutskie, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets. Asset prices were less volatile and financial market conditions eased somewhat over the intermeeting period as investor sentiment around the banking system stabilized. On net, nominal Treasury yields declined, equities appreciated, credit spreads tightened, and the trade-weighted value of the dollar de- preciated. Measures of implied volatility declined across markets. Policy-sensitive rates, however, fluctu- ated a fair amount over the period, particularly in re- sponse to economic data but also because of market perceptions of risk and liquidity conditions. Treasury market liquidity improved somewhat over the period but remained challenged. Treasury cash and futures markets continued to function in an orderly manner de- spite the lower-than-normal liquidity. Regarding developments late in the intermeeting pe- riod, the closure and acquisition of First Republic Bank were seen as orderly, though investors remained fo- cused on stresses in the banking sector. In addition, the U.S. Treasury Department announced it may not be able to fully satisfy the federal government’s obligations as early as June 1 if the debt limit is not raised or sus- pended, but that the actual date this event would occur might come a number of weeks later. Yields on Treas- ury bills and coupon securities maturing in the first half of June increased notably amid significant volatility. Deposit outflows from small and mid-sized banks largely stopped in late March and April. Although eq- uity prices for regional banks fell further over the pe- riod, for the vast majority of banks these declines ap- peared primarily to reflect expectations for lower prof- itability rather than solvency concerns. Market partici- pants remained alert to the possibility of another inten- sification of banking stress. Responses to the Open Market Desk’s Survey of Pri- mary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants suggest that investors’ macroeconomic outlooks were little changed from March despite ongoing focus on the im- plications of the expected tightening of credit. Re- spondents saw upside inflation risks, albeit less than in March. Market participants broadly expected a 25 basis point rate increase at the May meeting and saw the resulting rate as the likely peak for the current tightening cycle. Survey respondents assigned a much higher probability to the peak federal funds rate being between 5 and 5.25 percent than they did in March. However, re- spondents still assigned a substantial probability that the peak rate may turn out to be above 5.25 percent. Re- spondents expected the peak rate to be maintained through the January 2024 FOMC meeting. Regarding the balance sheet and money markets, bal- ance sheet runoff continued to proceed smoothly and overnight secured and unsecured rates continued to trade well within the target range for the federal funds rate. Respondents to the Desk’s surveys generally ex- pected that overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) balances will remain elevated in the near term before declining later this year. The ON RRP fa- cility continued to support effective policy implementa- tion and control over the federal funds rate, providing a strong floor for money market rates. Balances at the ON RRP facility remained within their recent range, in- dicating that use of the facility was not an important factor driving outflows of deposits from the banking system. Use of the ON RRP facility declined at times over the intermeeting period in response to increases in rates on overnight secured money market instruments and on short-term Federal Home Loan Bank debt. The Committee voted unanimously to renew the reciprocal currency arrangements with the Bank of Canada and the Bank of Mexico; these arrangements are associated with the Federal Reserve’s participation in the North American Framework Agreement of 1994. In addition, the Committee voted unanimously to renew the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank. The votes to renew the Federal Reserve’s participation in these standing arrangements occur annually at the April or May FOMC meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. Minutes of the Meeting of May 2–3, 2023Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ There were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the System’s account during the intermeeting period. the time of information available at Staff Review of the Economic Situation the The May 2–3 meeting indicated that real gross domestic product (GDP) had expanded at a modest pace in the first quarter. Labor market conditions remained tight in March, as job gains were robust and the unemploy- ment rate was low. Consumer price inflation—as meas- ured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)—con- tinued to be elevated in March. Limited data were avail- able on economic activity during the period after the onset of banking-sector stress in mid-March, although several recent surveys—such as the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) in April, the National Federation of Independent Busi- ness’s survey in March, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations in March—indicated that bank credit conditions were tightening further. The pace of increases in total nonfarm payroll employ- ment slowed in March but was still robust, and the un- employment rate ticked down to 3.5 percent. The un- employment rate for African Americans fell to 5.0 per- cent, and the jobless rate for Hispanics dropped to 4.6 percent. The aggregate measures of both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-popula- tion ratio edged up. The private-sector job openings rate—as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey—moved down markedly during Feb- ruary and March but remained high. Recent measures of nominal wage growth continued to ease from their peaks recorded last year but were still elevated. Over the 12 months ending in March, average hourly earnings for all employees rose 4.2 percent, well below its peak of 5.9 percent a year earlier. Over the year ending in March, the employment cost index (ECI) for private-sector workers increased 4.8 percent, down from its peak of 5.5 percent over the year ending in June of last year. Consumer price inflation remained elevated in March but continued to slow. Total PCE price inflation was 4.2 percent over the 12 months ending in March, and core PCE price inflation—which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices—was 4.6 percent; the total inflation measure was down markedly from its level in January, while the core measure was only slightly lower. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 4.7 percent in March. The latest survey-based measures of longer- term inflation expectations from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers in April and the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations in March remained within the range of their values reported in recent months; near-term measures of inflation expectations from these surveys moved up but were still below their peaks seen last year. Real GDP growth was modest in the first quarter, led by an increase in PCE. Gains in consumer spending picked up for the quarter as a whole, driven by a surge in January that was followed by a small net decline over February and March. Light motor vehicle sales, how- ever, picked up notably in April. Growth in business fixed investment slowed further in the first quarter, and new orders for nondefense capital goods excluding air- craft continued to decline in March, pointing to weak- ness in capital goods shipments in the near term. Resi- dential investment declined further in the first quarter but at a slower pace than last year. Net exports made a small positive contribution to GDP growth in the first quarter, as exports rebounded more strongly than im- ports from their fourth-quarter declines. U.S. manufac- turing output fell in March, and near-term indicators— such as national and regional indexes for new orders— pointed to more softening in factory output in the com- ing months. Foreign economic activity rebounded in the first quar- ter, reflecting the reopening of China’s economy from its COVID-19-related shutdowns, a pickup in the econ- omies of Canada and Mexico, and the resilience of Eu- rope’s economy to the energy price shock from Russia’s war on Ukraine; a mild winter also helped reduce energy demand in Europe. In contrast, economic growth else- where in emerging Asia was weak in the first quarter mainly due to a pronounced tech-cycle slowdown. Oil prices edged down amid concerns about the global economic outlook. A slowing of retail energy inflation continued to contribute to an easing of headline con- sumer price inflation in many advanced foreign econo- mies (AFEs). Core inflation showed signs of easing in some foreign economies but remained persistently ele- vated amid tight labor markets. Accordingly, many for- eign central banks continued their monetary policy tightening. That said, some central banks paused their policy rate increases or altered their forward guidance amid uncertainty about the global economic outlook Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ and the recent banking-sector stress. Some also sig- naled a shift toward a more data-dependent approach in future decisions. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Market sentiment improved over the intermeeting pe- riod, with concerns about a sharp near-term decelera- tion in economic activity appearing to recede as stress in the banking sector declined. The market-implied path for the federal funds rate in 2023 increased mod- estly over the period. Broad equity price indexes in- creased, although equity prices of some regional banks were lower, and equity market volatility declined. Fi- nancing conditions continued to be restrictive, and bor- rowing costs remained elevated. Over the intermeeting period, the market-implied path for the federal funds rate in 2023 rose modestly, par- tially unwinding the sharp decline observed in early March due to the banking-sector stress. For 2024 and 2025, the implied policy path based on overnight index swaps fluctuated amid mixed economic data releases, and declined slightly on net. Yields on nominal Treas- ury securities with maturities greater than one year moved lower, and inflation compensation at medium- and long-term horizons edged down slightly. Measures of uncertainty about the path of interest rates declined modestly but remained substantially elevated by histor- ical standards. Broad stock price indexes increased moderately, and the VIX—the one-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—decreased notably over the intermeeting pe- riod. However, market participants remained attentive to developments at regional banks. Equity prices at such banks broadly declined over the intermeeting pe- riod in part because of higher funding costs, as well as concerns about profitability and a possible deterioration in the performance of commercial real estate (CRE) loans. Risk sentiment in foreign financial markets also im- proved, on net, over the intermeeting period amid re- duced investor concerns about the banking sector, lead- ing to moderate increases in broad equity indexes and declines in option-implied measures of equity volatility. That said, equity prices for euro-area banks declined somewhat, on net, and remained significantly lower than their levels before the onset of banking stresses in early March. Market expectations of policy rates and sovereign yields were little changed in most AFEs but rose notably in the U.K., in part because of higher-than- expected wage and inflation data. The dollar continued its earlier depreciation as differentials between U.S. and AFE sovereign yields narrowed and global risk senti- ment improved. Outflows from funds dedicated to emerging markets slowed to near zero over the inter- meeting period, while sovereign credit spreads for emerging market economies were little changed on net. U.S. markets for commercial paper (CP) and negotiable certificates of deposit (NCDs) stabilized over the inter- meeting period. Spreads for lower-rated nonfinancial CP, which spiked following Silicon Valley Bank’s clo- sure, narrowed significantly. Outstanding levels of CP and NCDs increased modestly over the intermeeting period, while the share of short-maturity unsecured is- suance of CP and NCDs fell to normal levels, reflecting a net easing of stress associated with regional banks. Conditions in overnight bank funding and repurchase agreement markets remained stable over the intermeet- ing period, and the increase of 25 basis points in the Federal Reserve’s administered rates following the March FOMC meeting fully passed through to over- night money market rates. The effective federal funds rate printed at 4.83 percent every day during the period, while the Secured Overnight Financing Rate averaged 4.81 percent—slightly above the offering rate at the ON RRP facility. Daily take-up in the ON RRP facility remained elevated, reflecting continued significant us- age by money market mutual funds, ongoing uncer- tainty around the policy path, and limited supply of al- ternative investments such as Treasury bills. In domestic credit markets, borrowing costs for busi- nesses and households eased modestly in some markets but remained at elevated levels. Over the intermeeting period, yields on corporate bonds declined moderately, and yields on agency residential mortgage-backed secu- rities and 30-year conforming residential mortgage rates moved a little lower. However, interest rates on short- term small business loans continued to rise through March and reached their highest levels since the Global Financial Crisis. Credit flows for businesses and households slowed moderately, as high borrowing costs and market volatil- ity amid stress in the banking sector appeared to weigh on financing volumes in some markets. While issuance of nonfinancial corporate bonds and leveraged loans slowed notably in mid-March amid stress in the banking sector, issuance normalized over the intermeeting pe- riod as that stress abated later in the month and broader market sentiment rebounded. In April, speculative- grade nonfinancial bond issuance was solid, while in- vestment-grade nonfinancial bond issuance was sub- Minutes of the Meeting of May 2–3, 2023Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ dued, in part due to seasonal factors. Growth in com- mercial and industrial (C&I) loans on banks’ books was weak in the first quarter of 2023 relative to its pace in 2022. In the April SLOOS, banks reported further tightening of standards for most loan categories over the past three months, following widespread tightening in pre- vious quarters. Banks of all sizes expected their lending standards to tighten further for the rest of 2023. The most cited reason for tightening C&I standards and terms was a less favorable or more uncertain economic outlook. Mid-sized banks—those that have total con- solidated assets in the range of $50 billion to $250 bil- lion—tightened C&I standards more than other banks and additionally reported that a deterioration in their current or expected liquidity position was an important reason for their tightening. Such banks account for a bit over one-fourth of C&I lending. Banks of all sizes expected to tighten C&I standards further over the re- mainder of the year, with small and mid-sized banks more widely reporting this expectation. Although CRE loan growth on banks’ balance sheets remained robust in the first quarter, the April SLOOS indicated that loan standards across all CRE loan cate- gories tightened further in the first quarter. The re- ported tightening in standards over the first quarter was particularly widespread for mid-sized banks. Banks also reported that they expected to tighten CRE standards further over the remainder of the year, with mid-sized banks very broadly reporting this expectation. Mean- while, commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) issuance was very slow in February and March, amid higher spreads and volatility as well as tighter lending standards. Credit remained broadly available in the residential mortgage market for high-credit-score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria, but credit avail- ability for households with lower credit scores remained tight. In the April SLOOS, the net percentages of banks reporting tighter standards for all consumer loan categories during the first quarter were elevated relative to their historical range, and respondents expected that standards would continue to tighten over the remainder of 2023. Even so, consumer loans grew at a robust pace in the first quarter, with a continued strong expansion in revolving credit balances. Overall, the credit quality of most businesses and households remained solid but deteriorated somewhat for businesses with lower credit ratings and for house- holds with lower credit scores. The credit quality of C&I and CRE loans on banks’ balance sheets remained sound as of the end of the fourth quarter of last year. However, in the April SLOOS, banks frequently cited concerns about a deterioration in the quality of their loan portfolios as a reason for expecting to tighten standards over the remainder of the year. The staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system. The staff judged that the banking system was sound and resilient despite con- cerns about profitability at some banks. The staff judged that asset valuation pressures remained moder- ate. In particular, the staff noted that the equity risk premium and corporate bond spreads declined over the past few months but remained near historical medians. Valuations in both residential and commercial property markets remained elevated. Rising borrowing costs had contributed to a moderation of price pressures in hous- ing markets, and year-over-year house price increases had decelerated. The staff noted that the CRE sector remained vulnerable to large price declines. This possi- bility seemed particularly salient for office and down- town retail properties given the shift toward telework in many industries. The staff also noted analysis that found that while losses to CRE debt holders could be moderate in aggregate, some banks and the CMBS mar- ket could experience stress should prices of these prop- erties decline significantly. The staff assessed that vulnerabilities associated with household leverage remained at moderate levels. For nonfinancial businesses, debt relative to nominal GDP declined some but continued to be near a historically high level. The ability of nonfinancial firms to service their debt kept pace with rising debt loads and interest rates. In terms of financial-sector leverage, going into the pe- riod of recent bank stress, banks of all sizes appeared strong, with substantial loss-absorbing capacity as measured by regulatory capital ratios well above levels that prevailed before the Great Recession. However, the ratio of tangible common equity to total tangible as- sets at banks—excluding global systemically important banks—had fallen sharply in recent quarters, partly be- cause of a substantial drop in the value of securities held in their portfolios. The majority of the banking system had been able to effectively manage this interest rate risk exposure. However, the failure of three banks re- sulting from poor interest rate risk and liquidity risk management had put stress on some additional banks. For the nonbank sector, leverage at large hedge funds remained somewhat elevated in the third quarter of Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 2022, and more recent data from the Senior Credit Of- ficer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms sug- gested this fact had not changed. With regard to vulnerabilities associated with funding risks, the staff assessed that although funding strains had been notable for some banks, such strains remained low for the banking system as a whole, especially in light of official interventions by the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the U.S. Department of Treasury to support bank depositors. Outflows of funds from bank deposits in mid-March, which were concentrated at a limited number of banks, had slowed. Staff Economic Outlook The economic forecast prepared by the staff for the May FOMC meeting continued to assume that the ef- fects of the expected further tightening in bank credit conditions, amid already tight financial conditions, would lead to a mild recession starting later this year, followed by a moderately paced recovery. Real GDP was projected to decelerate over the next two quarters before declining modestly in both the fourth quarter of this year and the first quarter of next year. Real GDP growth over 2024 and 2025 was projected to be below the staff’s estimate of potential output growth. The un- employment rate was forecast to increase this year, to peak next year, and then to start declining gradually in 2025. Resource utilization in both product and labor markets was forecast to loosen, with the level of real output moving below the staff’s estimate of potential output in early 2024 and the unemployment rate rising above the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at that time. The staff’s core inflation forecast was revised up a little relative to the previous projection. Recent data for core PCE goods prices and the ECI measure of wage growth—the latter of which importantly influences the staff’s projection of core nonhousing services infla- tion—came in above expectations, and the staff judged that supply–demand imbalances in both goods markets and labor markets were easing a bit more slowly than anticipated. On a four-quarter change basis, total PCE price inflation was projected to be 3.1 percent this year, with core inflation at 3.8 percent. Core goods inflation was projected to move down further this year and then remain subdued, housing services inflation was ex- pected to have about peaked in the first quarter and to move down over the rest of the year, and core nonhous- ing services inflation was forecast to slow gradually as nominal wage growth eased further. Reflecting the pro- jected effects of less tightness in resource utilization, core inflation was forecast to slow through next year but remain moderately above 2 percent. With expected declines in consumer energy prices and a substantial moderation in food price inflation, total inflation was projected to run below core inflation this year and next. In 2025, both total and core PCE price inflation were expected to be at about 2 percent. The staff continued to judge that uncertainty around the baseline projection was considerable and still viewed risks as being determined importantly by the im- plications for macroeconomic conditions of develop- ments in the banking sector. If banking-sector stress were to abate more quickly or have less of an effect on macroeconomic conditions than assumed in the base- line, then the risks would be tilted to the upside for eco- nomic activity and inflation, a scenario that the staff viewed as only a little less likely than the baseline. If banking and financial conditions and their effects on macroeconomic conditions were to deteriorate more than assumed in the baseline, then the risks around the baseline would be skewed to the downside for eco- nomic activity and inflation. On balance, the staff saw the risks around the baseline inflation forecast as tilted to the upside, as an upside economic scenario with higher inflation appeared more likely than a downside scenario with lower inflation, and because inflation could continue to be more persistent than expected and inflation expectations could become unanchored after a long period of elevated inflation. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that economic activity had expanded at a modest pace in the first quarter. Nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate had remained low. Inflation remained elevated. Participants agreed that the U.S. banking sys- tem was sound and resilient. They commented that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. However, participants agreed that the extent of these effects remained uncertain. Against this back- ground, participants concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. In assessing the economic outlook, participants noted that the growth rate of real GDP in the first quarter of this year was modest despite a pickup in consumer spending, as inventory investment—a volatile cate- gory—declined substantially. Participants generally ex- pected real GDP to grow at a pace below its longer-run Minutes of the Meeting of May 2–3, 2023Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ trend rate in 2023, reflecting the effects of restrictive financial conditions. Participants assessed that the cu- mulative tightening of monetary policy over the past year had contributed significantly to more restrictive fi- nancial conditions. They also judged that banking-sec- tor stress would likely weigh further on economic activ- ity, but the extent to which that would be the case re- mained highly uncertain. With inflation well above the Committee’s longer-run 2 percent objective, and core inflation showing only some signs of moderation, par- ticipants expected that a period of below-trend growth in real GDP and some softening in labor market condi- tions would be needed to bring aggregate supply and aggregate demand into better balance and reduce infla- tionary pressures over time. Participants generally noted that the actions taken by the Federal Reserve and other government agencies in response to developments in the banking sector had been effective in largely reducing stress. They noted that conditions in the banking sector had broadly im- proved since early March, with the initial deposit out- flows experienced by some regional and smaller banks moderating substantially over subsequent weeks. Many participants commented that the recent developments in the banking sector had contributed to some tighten- ing of lending standards beyond that which had oc- curred during previous quarters, especially among small and mid-sized banks. Some participants noted that small businesses tend to rely on small and mid-sized banks as primary sources of credit and therefore may disproportionally bear the effects of tighter lending conditions. Some participants mentioned that access to credit had not yet appeared to have declined signifi- cantly since the recent onset of stress in the banking sector. Participants judged that stress in the banking sector would, in coming quarters, likely induce banks to tighten lending standards by more than they would have in response to higher interest rates alone. However, participants generally noted that it was too early to as- sess with confidence the magnitude and persistence of these effects on economic activity. In their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that consumer spending showed strength in the first quarter, supported by gains in personal disposable income. They also remarked that the quarterly strength was driven mainly by very strong spending growth in January, while real spending fell modestly over February and March. Consistent with that slowing, participants anticipated that consumer spending would likely grow at a subdued rate over the remainder of 2023, reflecting in large part the effects of the tightening in financial conditions over the past year. Participants remarked that higher interest rates would continue to restrain in- terest-sensitive expenditures by households, such as those on housing and durable goods. Participants also noted that the rise in uncertainty associated with recent developments in the banking sector could weigh on consumer sentiment and spending. However, several participants observed that high-frequency measures of consumer sentiment had not yet shown significant changes following the banking-sector developments. A few participants remarked that there had been some on- going reduction in consumers’ discretionary expendi- tures in the face of elevated inflation and higher bor- rowing rates, especially among lower- and middle-in- come households; some of those declines were report- edly driven by shifts in purchases toward lower-cost op- tions. Regarding the business sector, participants observed that growth in business fixed investment was subdued in the first quarter, reflecting relatively high borrowing costs, weak growth of business-sector output, and busi- nesses’ increasing concerns about the general economic outlook. Participants expected the tightening of bank lending standards to weigh further on firms’ capital ex- penditures. Several participants noted that, based on reports from their District contacts, concerns related to banking-sector stress could add more uncertainty to an already soft economic outlook, increasing firms’ cau- tion, especially at smaller and mid-sized firms that rely heavily on bank credit to finance their operations. However, some other participants mentioned that de- velopments in the banking sector appeared to have had only a modest effect so far on credit availability for firms. Participants noted that the labor market remained very tight, with robust payroll gains in March and an unem- ployment rate near historically low levels. Nevertheless, they noted some signs that the imbalance of supply and demand in the labor market was easing, with prime-age labor force participation returning to its pre-pandemic level and further reductions in the rates of job openings and quits. In addition, some participants noted that their District contacts reported less difficulty in hiring, lower turnover rates, and some layoffs. Participants an- ticipated that employment growth would likely slow further, reflecting a moderation in aggregate demand coming partly from tighter credit conditions. Partici- pants remarked that although nominal wage growth ap- peared to be slowing gradually, it was still running at a pace that, given current estimates of trend productivity growth, was well above what would be consistent over Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ the longer run with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. Participants generally anticipated that under appropriate monetary policy, imbalances in the labor market would gradually diminish, easing pressures on wages and prices. Participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high. They commented that data through March indi- cated that declines in inflation, particularly for measures of core inflation, had been slower than they had ex- pected. Participants observed that although core goods inflation had moderated since the middle of last year, it had decelerated less rapidly than expected in recent months, despite reports from several business contacts of supply chain constraints continuing to ease. Addi- tionally, participants emphasized that core nonhousing services inflation had shown few signs of slowing in the past few months. Some participants remarked that a further easing in labor market conditions would be needed to help bring down inflation in this component. Regarding housing services inflation, participants ob- served that soft readings on rents for leases signed by new tenants were starting to feed into measured infla- tion. They expected that this process would continue and would help lead to a decline in housing services in- flation over this year. In discussing the likely effects on inflation of recent banking-sector developments, sev- eral participants remarked that tighter credit conditions may not put much downward pressure on inflation in part because lower credit availability could restrain ag- gregate supply as well as aggregate demand. Several participants noted that longer-term measures of infla- tion expectations from surveys of households and busi- nesses remained well anchored. Participants empha- sized that with appropriate firming of monetary policy, well-anchored longer-term inflation expectations would support a return of inflation to the Committee’s 2 per- cent longer-run goal. Participants noted that risks associated with the recent banking stress had led them to raise their already high assessment of uncertainty around their economic out- looks. Participants judged that risks to the outlook for economic activity were weighted to the downside, al- though a few noted the risks were two sided. In dis- cussing sources of downside risk to economic activity, participants referenced the possibility that the cumula- tive tightening of monetary policy could affect eco- nomic activity more than expected, and that further strains in the banking sector could prove more substan- tial than anticipated. Some participants also noted con- cerns that the statutory limit on federal debt might not be raised in a timely manner, threatening significant dis- ruptions to the financial system and tighter financial conditions that weaken the economy. Regarding risks to inflation, participants cited the possibility that price pressures could prove more persistent than anticipated because of, for example, stronger-than-expected con- sumer spending and a tight labor market, especially if the effect of bank stress on economic activity proved modest. However, a few participants cited the possibil- ity that further tightening of credit conditions could slow household spending and reduce business invest- ment and hiring, all of which would support the ongo- ing rebalancing of supply and demand in product and labor markets and reduce inflation pressures. In their discussion of financial stability, various partici- pants commented on recent developments in the bank- ing sector. These participants noted that the banking system was sound and resilient, that actions taken by the Federal Reserve in coordination with other govern- ment agencies had served to calm conditions in that sec- tor, but that stresses remained. A number of partici- pants noted that the banking sector was well capitalized overall, and that the most significant issues in the bank- ing system appeared to be limited to a small number of banks with poor risk-management practices or substan- tial exposure to specific vulnerabilities. These vulnera- bilities included significant unrealized losses on assets resulting from rising interest rates, heavy reliance on un- insured deposits, or strained profitability amid higher funding costs. Some participants additionally noted that, because of weak fundamentals for CRE such as high vacancy rates in the office segment, high exposure to such assets was a vulnerability for some banks. Par- ticipants also commented on the susceptibility of some nonbank financial institutions to runs or instability. These included money market funds, which had re- cently experienced large cash inflows; hedge funds, which tend to use substantial leverage and may hold concentrated positions in some assets with low or zero margin; thinly capitalized nonbank mortgage servicers; and digital asset entities. Many participants mentioned that it is essential that the debt limit be raised in a timely manner to avoid the risk of severely adverse disloca- tions in the financial system and the broader economy. A few participants noted the importance of orderly functioning of the market for U.S. Treasury securities or stressed the importance of the appropriate authori- ties continuing to address issues related to the resilience of the market. A number of participants emphasized that the Federal Reserve should maintain readiness to use its liquidity tools, as well as its microprudential and Minutes of the Meeting of May 2–3, 2023Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ macroprudential regulatory and supervisory tools, to mitigate future financial stability risks. In their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants concurred that in- flation remained substantially elevated relative to the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. Economic activity had expanded at a modest pace in the first quar- ter. The labor market continued to be tight, with robust job gains in recent months, and the unemployment rate remained low. Participants also noted that recent de- velopments in the banking sector would likely result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which would weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. However, the extent of these effects re- mained uncertain. Against this backdrop, all partici- pants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5 per- cent to 5¼ percent. All participants agreed that it was also appropriate to continue the process of reducing the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, as described in its previously announced Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet. In discussing the policy outlook, participants generally agreed that in light of the lagged effects of cumulative tightening in monetary policy and the potential effects on the economy of a further tightening in credit condi- tions, the extent to which additional increases in the tar- get range may be appropriate after this meeting had be- come less certain. Participants agreed that it would be important to closely monitor incoming information and assess the implications for monetary policy. In deter- mining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, various participants noted specific factors that should bear on future decisions on policy actions. One such factor was the degree and timing with which cu- mulative policy tightening restrained economic activity and reduced inflation, with some participants com- menting that they saw evidence that the past years’ tightening was beginning to have its intended effect. Another factor was the degree to which tighter credit conditions for households and businesses resulting from events in the banking sector would weigh on ac- tivity and reduce inflation, which participants agreed was very uncertain. Additional factors included the progress toward returning inflation to the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent, and the pace at which la- bor market conditions softened and economic growth slowed. Participants also discussed several risk-management considerations that could bear on future policy deci- sions. A few assessed that there were upside risks to economic growth. However, almost all participants commented that downside risks to growth and upside risks to unemployment had increased because of the possibility that banking-sector developments could lead to further tightening of credit conditions and weigh on economic activity. Almost all participants stated that, with inflation still well above the Committee’s longer- run goal and the labor market remaining tight, upside risks to the inflation outlook remained a key factor shaping the policy outlook. A few participants noted that they also saw some downside risks to inflation. Taking into account these various considerations, par- ticipants discussed their views on the extent to which further policy firming after the current meeting may be appropriate. Participants generally expressed uncer- tainty about how much more policy tightening may be appropriate. Many participants focused on the need to retain optionality after this meeting. Some participants commented that, based on their expectations that pro- gress in returning inflation to 2 percent could continue to be unacceptably slow, additional policy firming would likely be warranted at future meetings. Several participants noted that if the economy evolved along the lines of their current outlooks, then further policy firming after this meeting may not be necessary. In light of the prominent risks to the Committee’s objec- tives with respect to both maximum employment and price stability, participants generally noted the im- portance of closely monitoring incoming information and its implications for the economic outlook. Participants discussed the importance and various as- pects of clearly explaining monetary policy actions and strategy. All participants reaffirmed their strong com- mitment to returning inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective over time and remained highly at- tentive to inflation risks. A few participants com- mented that recent monetary policy actions and com- munications had helped keep inflation expectations well anchored, which they saw as important for the attain- ment of the Committee’s goals. Participants empha- sized the importance of communicating to the public the data-dependent approach of policymakers, and the vast majority of participants commented that the ad- justed language in the postmeeting statement was help- ful in that respect. Some participants stressed that it was crucial to communicate that the language in the postmeeting statement should not be interpreted as sig- naling either that decreases in the target range are likely Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ this year or that further increases in the target range had been ruled out. Committee Policy Actions In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had expanded at a modest pace in the first quarter. They also con- curred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Infla- tion had remained elevated. Members concurred that the U.S. banking system was sound and resilient. They also agreed that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. Members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to in- flation risks. Members agreed that the Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 5 to 5¼ percent. Members agreed to closely monitor incoming information and as- sess the implications for monetary policy. In determin- ing the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, members concurred that they will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and in- flation, and economic and financial developments. In addition, members agreed that they will continue reduc- ing the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securi- ties, as described in its previously announced plans. All members affirmed that they are strongly committed to returning inflation to their 2 percent objective. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to mon- itor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. They would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Com- mittee’s goals. Members also agreed that their assess- ments will take into account a wide range of infor- mation, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and fi- nancial and international developments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective May 4, 2023, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 5 to 5¼ percent. • Conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. • Conduct standing overnight reverse repur- chase agreement operations at an offering rate of 5.05 percent and with a per-coun- terparty limit of $160 billion per day. • Roll over at auction the amount of princi- pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that cou- pon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of agency debt and agency MBS re- ceived in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Economic activity expanded at a modest pace in the first quarter. Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Inflation remains elevated. The U.S. banking system is sound and resilient. Tighter credit conditions for households and Minutes of the Meeting of May 2–3, 2023Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ businesses are likely to weigh on economic ac- tivity, hiring, and inflation. The extent of these effects remains uncertain. The Committee re- mains highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 per- cent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 5 to 5¼ per- cent. The Committee will closely monitor in- coming information and assess the implica- tions for monetary policy. In determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into ac- count the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy af- fects economic activity and inflation, and eco- nomic and financial developments. In addi- tion, the Committee will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as de- scribed in its previously announced plans. The Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of mone- tary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming infor- mation for the economic outlook. The Com- mittee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assess- ments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor mar- ket conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michael S. Barr, Michelle W. Bowman, Lisa D. Cook, Austan D. Goolsbee, Patrick Harker, Philip N. Jefferson, Neel Kashkari, Lorie K. Logan, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Gover- nors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 5.15 percent, effective May 4, 2023. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unani- mously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary effective May 4, 2023.4 to 5.25 percent, credit rate It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 13– 14, 2023. The meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m. on May 3, 2023. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on April 11, 2023, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on March 21–22, 2023. _______________________ Joshua Gallin Secretary 4 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. The vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 5.25 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Bank, effective on the later of May 4, 2023, or the date such Reserve Bank informs the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of New York was informed of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 5.25 percent, effective May 4, 2023.) Page 12Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee June 13–14, 2023 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, June 13, 2023, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 14, 2023, at 9:00 a.m.1 Julie Ann Remache, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Jose Acosta, Senior Communications Analyst, Division of Information Technology, Board Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michael S. Barr Michelle W. Bowman Lisa D. Cook Austan D. Goolsbee Patrick Harker Philip N. Jefferson Neel Kashkari Lorie K. Logan Christopher J. Waller Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, and Loretta J. Mester, Alternate Members of the Committee James Bullard and Susan M. Collins, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Boston, respectively Kelly J. Dubbert, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Joshua Gallin, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Richard Ostrander, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Roc Armenter, James A. Clouse, Brian M. Doyle, Beverly J. Hirtle, Andrea Raffo, Chiara Scotti, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Roberto Perli, Manager, System Open Market Account Gianni Amisano, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Philippe Andrade, Senior Economist and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Alyssa Arute,2 Manager, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Penelope A. Beattie,3 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board Carol C. Bertaut, Senior Adviser, Division of International Finance, Board Jennifer J. Burns, Deputy Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board Marco Cagetti, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Mark A. Carlson, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Juan C. Climent, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Stephanie E. Curcuru, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board Ahmet Degerli, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Cynthia L. Doniger, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. 3 Attended through the discussion of the economic and finan- cial situation and all of Wednesday’s session. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Erin E. Ferris, Principal Economist, Division of Michelle M. Neal, Head of Markets, Federal Reserve Monetary Affairs, Board Bank of New York Jonas Fisher, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Bank of Chicago Affairs, Board Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, Vice President, Federal Research and Statistics, Board Reserve Bank of San Francisco Jennifer Gallagher, Assistant to the Board, Division of Achilles Sangster II, Senior Information Manager, Board Members, Board Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Carlos Garriga, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Zeynep Senyuz, Deputy Associate Director, Division Bank of St. Louis of Monetary Affairs, Board David Glancy,4 Principal Economist, Division of Margie Shanks, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Monetary Affairs, Board Secretary, Board Christopher J. Gust, Associate Director, Division of Nitish Ranjan Sinha, Special Adviser to the Board, Monetary Affairs, Board Division of Board Members, Board Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of A. Lee Smith, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Monetary Affairs, Board Bank of Kansas City Jane E. Ihrig, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Hiroatsu Tanaka,5 Senior Economist, Division of Board Members, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Mary H. Tian, Group Manager, Division of Monetary Financial Stability, Board Affairs, Board Don H. Kim,2 Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Robert L. Triplett III, First Vice President, Federal Affairs, Board Reserve Bank of Dallas Edward S. Knotek II, Senior Vice President, Federal Clara Vega, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Reserve Bank of Cleveland Board Members, Board Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Daniel J. Vine, Principal Economist, Division of Stability, Board Research and Statistics, Board Paul Lengermann, Assistant Director, Division of Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Kurt F. Lewis, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Geng Li, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Laura Lipscomb, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Brent Meyer, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Bernardo C. Morais, Principal Economist, Division of International Finance, Board Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Fabian Winkler, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Alexander L. Wolman, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Paul R. Wood, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rebecca Zarutskie, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board 4 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 5 Attended from the discussion of the economic and financial situation through the end of Tuesday’s session. Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets. Policy-sensitive rates increased over the intermeeting period, reflecting indications of contin- ued resilience in the economy, persistently elevated core inflation, and reduced downside tail risks following the resolution of the debt limit. The shift in policy expecta- tions contributed significantly to higher Treasury yields. The increase in nominal yields primarily reflected higher real rates rather than inflation compensation. Broad eq- uity prices rose, although the outperformance was con- centrated in a handful of companies with a large market capitalization. Cyclical sectors fared better than sectors that tend to appreciate in a downturn, suggesting some reduced investor concern about downside risks to growth. Investor sentiment about the banking sector improved as perceived tail risks regarding regional banks appeared to have receded. Equity prices for regional banks rose over the intermeeting period but were still well below early March levels. Financial conditions in- dexes were roughly unchanged, as higher rates and a stronger dollar were offset by higher equity prices and narrower credit spreads. The vast majority of respondents to the Open Market Desk’s Surveys of Primary Dealers and Market Partici- pants expected no rate change at this meeting. While the median path from the surveys pointed to no rate changes through early 2024, there was significant dispersion across respondents, and respondents saw a clear proba- bility of additional tightening at coming meetings. Re- spondents’ average probability distribution for the level of the peak policy rate shifted higher since the May meet- ing and respondents on average assigned about 60 per- cent probability to the peak being above the current tar- get range. The market-implied path for the policy rate continued to show some decline this year but less so than it had in recent months. Measures of uncertainty about the path of the policy rate derived from options remained very elevated, though they came down some over the intermeeting period. Desk survey respondents still saw a recession occurring in the near term as quite likely, but the expected timing was again pushed later, as economic data pointed to the continued resilience of economic activity. Overall, re- spondents generally continued to expect that any down- turn would be neither deep nor prolonged. With regard to inflation expectations, respondents marked up their projections for quarterly core personal consumption ex- penditures (PCE) inflation in the second and third quar- ters of this year, while projections for later quarters were little changed. The manager then turned to money market develop- ments and policy implementation. The median respond- ent to the Desk surveys expected the three-month bill yield to increase slightly relative to the similar-maturity overnight index swap (OIS) rate and to remain above it into the fourth quarter. This expectation likely reflected a combination of rising net supply of bills as part of the Treasury Department’s plan to rebuild the Treasury General Account (TGA) following the resolution of the debt limit and expectations for healthy investor demand for bills. The overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility, which continued to support effective policy implementation and control over the federal funds rate, saw somewhat lower participation since the resolution of the debt limit, consistent with the historical experience that ON RRP participation is typically re- sponsive to changes in money market conditions. The median respondent to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers expected ON RRP participation to trend lower over the rest of this year. The staff assessed that the replenishment of the TGA and the ongoing balance sheet runoff, among other factors, were likely to subtract from reserves more than the decline in ON RRP partic- ipation would add to them. On net, the staff judged that reserves at the end of the year were likely to remain abundant. Uncertainty surrounding the outlooks for both reserves and ON RRP participation was substan- tial. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the June 13–14 meeting suggested that real gross domestic product (GDP) was expanding at a modest pace in the second quarter. Labor market conditions remained tight in re- cent months, as job gains were robust and the unem- ployment rate was low. Consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for PCE—continued to be elevated in April. Labor market conditions remained tight in April and May. Total nonfarm payroll employment increased at a robust pace during those two months. The unemploy- ment rate edged up, on net, but was still at a low level of 3.7 percent in May. On balance, the unemployment rate Minutes of the Meeting of June 13–14, 2023Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ for African Americans moved up to 5.6 percent, while the jobless rate for Hispanics moved down to 4.0 per- cent. In aggregate, the labor force participation rate held steady in April and May, and the employment-to- population ratio ticked down. The private-sector job openings rate in April—as measured by the Job Open- ings and Labor Turnover Survey—was unchanged from its relatively high first-quarter average, though it was lower than a year earlier. Recent measures of nominal wage growth continued to be elevated, although lower than their highs last year. Over the 12 months ending in May, average hourly earn- ings for all employees increased 4.3 percent, below its peak of 5.9 percent early last year. Over the year ending in the first quarter, compensation per hour in the busi- ness sector increased 3.2 percent, down from 5.5 percent a year earlier. Consumer price inflation remained elevated. Total PCE price inflation had eased since the middle of last year, reflecting declines in consumer energy prices and soften- ing consumer food price inflation, but recent readings for core PCE price inflation—which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and most consumer food prices and usually provides a better signal about future inflation than the more volatile total inflation measure— were little changed. Total PCE price inflation was 4.4 percent over the 12 months ending in April, and core PCE price inflation was 4.7 percent—the same as the 12-month percent change recorded in January. In May, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 4.0 percent, and core CPI inflation was 5.3 per- cent—only slightly below its January reading. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price infla- tion constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 4.8 percent in April. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations in May from the Uni- versity of Michigan Surveys of Consumers and the Fed- eral Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Consumer Expectations remained within the range of their values reported in the decade before the pandemic; near-term measures of inflation expectations from these surveys moved down in May and continued to be below their peaks seen last year. Real GDP appeared to be increasing modestly in the sec- ond quarter following its stronger first-quarter gain. Pri- vate domestic final purchases (PDFP)—which includes PCE, residential investment, and business fixed invest- ment and often provides a better signal of underlying economic momentum than GDP—looked to be ex- panding more slowly in the second quarter than its ro- bust first-quarter pace. For the first half as a whole, PDFP growth seemed to be more resilient than in the second half of last year. The annual revisions to international trade statistics sug- gested that net exports contributed positively to U.S. real GDP growth in the first quarter, with real exports re- bounding more strongly than real imports following their fourth-quarter declines. In April, however, the nominal trade deficit widened notably, as nominal ex- ports decreased and nominal imports rose further. Foreign economic growth rebounded in the first quarter, reflecting in part the reopening of China’s economy from its COVID-19-related shutdowns and strong services-sector activity in other Asian countries, Canada, and Mexico. In the euro area, however, real GDP con- tracted modestly for a second consecutive quarter amid a pullback in consumer spending. Indicators pointed to a step-down in the pace of foreign economic growth in the second quarter, with the impetus from China’s reo- pening dissipating and global manufacturing activity re- maining weak. Global prices for energy and agricultural commodities were little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period, while prices for metals fell further. Declines in retail en- ergy prices since the beginning of the year contributed to a notable easing in headline consumer price inflation in the foreign economies. By contrast, core inflation had yet to materially decline from its recent highs in many economies. In this context, and with tight labor market conditions, foreign central banks underscored the need to raise policy rates further or hold them at sufficiently restrictive levels to bring inflation back to their respec- tive targets and be well positioned in case inflation failed to decline as expected. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, market participants ap- peared to interpret incoming data as signaling, on bal- ance, more resilience in economic activity than previ- ously assumed and viewed communications from FOMC participants overall as pointing to a tighter path for policy than expected. As a result, Treasury yields and the expected future path for the federal funds rate shifted upward significantly. Meanwhile, broad equity prices also increased notably. Financing conditions re- mained moderately restrictive, but credit availability gen- erally remained solid. The expected path of the policy rate implied by market quotes moved up notably over the intermeeting period. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ A straight read of federal funds futures rates suggested that market participants expected that the federal funds rate would be roughly flat over the course of the rest of this year. The year-end expected rate was about 70 basis points higher than the year-end expectation before the May FOMC meeting. Beyond this year, the policy rate path implied by OIS quotes also moved up, to about 3.7 percent by the end of 2024. Similarly, nominal Treasury yields rose significantly. The rise in nominal yields mostly reflected an increase in real yields, as measures of inflation compensation were little changed, on net, amid somewhat mixed news on inflation. Measures of uncertainty about the path of interest rates remained very elevated by historical standards. The S&P 500 stock price index increased sizably, on net, over the intermeeting period, led by technology-related stocks. The VIX—the one-month option-implied vola- tility on the S&P 500 index—edged down, on balance, and ended the period near the 30th percentile of its his- torical distribution. Bank equity price indexes moved up notably, on net, over the intermeeting period. Stock prices for large banks were only somewhat below their levels before the failure of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), while those for regional banks remained below their lev- els in early March. Market-based policy rate expectations rose notably in most advanced foreign economies, as core inflation data surprised to the upside in some countries and central bank communications were perceived as pointing to more restrictive policy than expected. Notwithstanding the rise in global yields, foreign equity prices, credit spreads, and risk sentiment in foreign markets were little changed over the intermeeting period. The staff’s trade- weighted broad dollar index was also little changed, on net, but the exchange value of the dollar appreciated sig- nificantly against the Chinese renminbi amid increased investor concerns over China’s economic growth pro- spects. Conditions in overnight bank funding and repurchase agreement markets remained generally stable over the in- termeeting period. The 25 basis point increase in admin- istered rates at the May FOMC meeting fully passed through to overnight money market rates. Spreads and issuance volumes in unsecured short-term funding mar- kets stayed within their typical ranges. In May, yields of Treasury bills maturing in June and thus potentially af- fected by the federal debt limit rose sharply before largely retracing those increases after an agreement was reached to suspend the debt limit. In domestic credit markets, borrowing costs for busi- nesses, households, and municipalities increased notably over the intermeeting period. Interest rates on newly originated bank loans to businesses and households in the first quarter rose further above their peaks from the previous tightening cycle, and yields on leveraged loans also rose, reaching levels close to their peak at the onset of the pandemic. Rates also moved up on a broad array of fixed-income securities, including investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds, municipal bonds, both agency and non-agency commercial mortgage- backed securities (CMBS), and agency residential mortgage-backed securities. The increases in yields on these instruments over the intermeeting period were generally in line with, or less than, the changes in their Treasury benchmarks. Small businesses and households saw continued increases in their borrowing costs. Rates on 30-year conforming residential mortgages stepped up, broadly in line with increases in comparable-duration Treasury yields. Interest rates on credit card offers con- tinued to rise through April, and auto loan interest rates moved sideways during the intermeeting period. Both credit card and auto loan interest rates stood at, or near, their highest levels since the Global Financial Crisis. Banks’ ability to fund loans to businesses and consumers appeared to have stabilized in recent weeks but remained somewhat strained relative to before the closure of SVB in March. Although banks continued to experience out- flows of core deposits, the pace of those outflows mod- erated substantially relative to March, suggesting some easing of bank funding pressures. Banks also continued to attract inflows of large time deposits, reflecting higher interest rates on new certificates of deposit. Total bank assets were little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period. In capital markets, funding had generally been resilient. Issuance of nonfinancial investment-grade corporate bonds rose at a robust pace in May after slowing in April, partly due to the “earnings blackout” period. Specula- tive-grade issuance increased in late April and in May but remained subdued by historical standards. Gross issu- ance of municipal bonds was solid in April and May. Conditions in the leveraged loan and CMBS markets were somewhat more strained. Leveraged loan issuance remained subdued, reflecting weak investor demand amid concerns over the credit worthiness of borrowers. Both agency and non-agency CMBS issuance volumes were low in May relative to pre-pandemic levels. In ad- dition, for small businesses, credit availability continued to show signs of tightening. Minutes of the Meeting of June 13–14, 2023Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Credit remained easily available in the residential mort- gage market for high credit score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. For borrowers with lower scores, credit availability tightened slightly in April but remained close to pre-pandemic levels. In consumer credit markets, conditions stayed generally accommoda- tive, with credit available for most borrowers. The credit quality of most businesses and households re- mained solid, although market participants appeared to expect some deterioration in the coming quarters, which could weaken lender balance sheets and possibly weigh on credit availability. A measure of the May CMBS de- linquency rate showed about a 50 basis point increase, driven by a sharp rise in the delinquency rate for office buildings. Staff Economic Outlook The economic forecast prepared by the staff for the June FOMC meeting continued to assume that the effects of the expected further tightening in bank credit condi- tions, amid already tight financial conditions, would lead to a mild recession starting later this year, followed by a moderately paced recovery. Real GDP was projected to decelerate in the current quarter and the next one before declining modestly in both the fourth quarter of this year and first quarter of next year. Real GDP growth over 2024 and 2025 was projected to be below the staff’s es- timate of potential output growth. The unemployment rate was forecast to increase this year, peak next year, and remain near that level through 2025. Current tight resource utilization in both product and labor markets was forecast to ease, with the level of real output moving below the staff’s estimate of potential output in 2025 and the unemployment rate rising above the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at that time. The staff’s inflation forecast was little revised relative to the previous projection, and supply–demand imbalances in both goods markets and labor markets were still judged to be easing only slowly. On a four-quarter change basis, total PCE price inflation was projected to be 3.0 percent this year, with core inflation at 3.7 per- cent. Core goods inflation was forecast to move down further this year and then remain subdued. Housing ser- vices inflation was considered to have about peaked and was expected to move down over the rest of the year. Core nonhousing services inflation was projected to slow gradually as nominal wage growth eased further. Reflecting the effects of the easing in resource utilization over the projection, core inflation was forecast to slow through next year but remain moderately above 2 per- cent. With expected declines in consumer energy prices and further moderation in food price inflation, total in- flation was projected to run below core inflation this year and the next. In 2025, both total and core PCE price inflation were expected to be close to 2 percent. The staff continued to judge that uncertainty around the baseline projection was considerable and still viewed the risks as being influenced importantly by the potential macroeconomic implications of banking-sector develop- ments, which could end up being more, or less, negative than assumed in the baseline. Given the continued strength in labor market conditions and the resilience of consumer spending, however, the staff saw the possibil- ity of the economy continuing to grow slowly and avoid- ing a downturn as almost as likely as the mild-recession baseline. On balance, the staff saw the risks around the baseline inflation forecast as tilted to the upside, as eco- nomic scenarios with higher inflation appeared more likely than scenarios with lower inflation and because in- flation could continue to be more persistent than ex- pected and inflation expectations could become unan- chored after a long period of elevated inflation. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2023 through 2025 and over the longer run. The projections were based on their individ- ual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, includ- ing the path of the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that economic activity had continued to expand at a modest pace. Nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. Inflation remained elevated. Participants agreed that the U.S. banking system was sound and resilient. They commented that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. How- ever, participants agreed that the extent of these effects remained uncertain. Against this background, partici- pants concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ In assessing the economic outlook, most participants noted that real GDP growth had been resilient in recent quarters. Participants generally judged that growth would be subdued over the remainder of this year. They assessed that the cumulative tightening of monetary pol- icy over the past year had contributed significantly to more restrictive financial conditions and lower demand in the most interest rate sensitive sectors of the econ- omy, especially housing and business investment. Par- ticipants also acknowledged uncertainty about the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy and discussed the extent to which the full effects of mone- tary tightening on the economy had been realized. While total inflation had moderated over the past year, core in- flation had not shown a sustained easing since the begin- ning of the year. With inflation well above the Commit- tee’s longer-run 2 percent objective, participants ex- pected that a period of below-trend growth in real GDP and some softening in labor market conditions would be needed to bring aggregate supply and aggregate demand into better balance and reduce inflationary pressures suf- ficiently to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Participants generally noted that banking stresses had re- ceded and conditions in the banking sector were much improved since early March. Participants generally con- tinued to judge that a tightening in credit conditions spurred by banking-sector stress earlier in the year would likely weigh further on economic activity, but the extent remained uncertain. Several participants mentioned that credit conditions had not appeared to have tightened sig- nificantly beyond what would be expected in response to the monetary policy actions taken since early last year. Some participants judged that it was still too early to as- sess with confidence the eventual effects of tighter bank credit conditions on economic activity and noted that it would be important to monitor closely the potential ef- fects of banking-sector developments on credit condi- tions and economic activity. In their discussion of the household sector, participants generally noted that consumer spending so far this year had been stronger than expected. Several participants noted that aggregate household wealth remained high, as equity and home prices had not declined much from their recent highs. A few participants mentioned that while, overall, the household sector still retained much of the excess savings it had accumulated during the pan- demic, there were signs that consumers were facing in- creasingly tighter budget constraints, given high inflation and, especially for low-income households, depleted sav- ings. Regarding the business sector, various participants said that reports from their contacts were mixed, with some pointing to softening economic conditions and others indicating greater-than-expected strength. Many partic- ipants noted that developments in the banking sector ap- peared to have had only a modest effect so far on credit availability for firms. Some participants remarked that the effect of high interest rates on the housing sector ap- peared to be bottoming out, with home sales, builder sentiment, and new construction all having improved a little since the start of the year. In their discussion of economic activity, several partici- pants pointed out that recent GDP readings had been stronger than expected earlier in the year, while gross domestic income (GDI) readings had been weak. Of those who noted the discrepancy between GDP and GDI, most suggested that economic momentum may not be as strong as indicated by the GDP readings. In discussing that possibility, a couple of these participants also cited the recent subdued growth in aggregate hours worked. Participants noted that labor market conditions re- mained very tight, with robust payroll gains and the un- employment rate still near historically low levels. Nev- ertheless, they noted some signs that supply and demand in the labor market were coming into better balance, with the prime-age labor force participation rate moving up in recent months and further reductions in rates of job openings and quits, and declines in average weekly hours. A couple of participants conveyed that they heard at a recent Fed Listens event that, in various parts of the country, the lack of affordable housing in the area was preventing some lower-income workers from relo- cating to accept jobs. Similarly, a few participants noted that their District contacts reported less difficulty in hir- ing and retaining workers, lower turnover rates, and some layoffs. Some participants pointed out that payroll gains had remained robust but noted that some other measures of employment—such as those based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ household survey, the Quar- terly Census of Employment and Wages, or the Board staff’s measure of private employment using data from the payroll processing firm ADP—suggested that job growth may have been weaker than indicated by payroll employment. Participants anticipated that employment growth would likely slow further, consistent with their projections of below-trend economic growth. Partici- pants noted that nominal wage growth had shown signs of easing but observed that it was still running at a pace that, given current estimates of trend productivity growth, was above what would be consistent over the Minutes of the Meeting of June 13–14, 2023Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ longer run with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation ob- jective. Participants expected supply and demand con- ditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing pressures on wages and prices. Participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high and noted that the data, including the CPI for May, indi- cated that declines in inflation had been slower than they had expected. Participants observed that although core goods inflation had moderated since the middle of last year, it had slowed less rapidly than expected in recent months, despite data and reports from business contacts indicating that supply chain constraints had continued to ease. Some participants noted the recent moderation in housing services inflation and expected this trend to continue. However, a few participants pointed to upside risks to the outlook for housing services inflation asso- ciated with near-record low inventories of homes for sale, solid housing demand, and less-than-expected de- celeration recently in measures of rents for leases signed by new tenants. Additionally, some participants re- marked that core nonhousing services inflation had shown few signs of slowing in the past few months. Sev- eral participants noted that longer-term measures of in- flation expectations from surveys of households and businesses remained well anchored. Participants empha- sized that, with appropriate firming of monetary policy, well-anchored longer-term inflation expectations would support a return of inflation to the Committee’s 2 per- cent longer-run goal over time. Participants generally noted a high degree of uncertainty regarding the cumulative effects on the economy from both already-enacted monetary policy tightening and the potential additional tightening in credit conditions stem- ming from recent banking-sector developments. Partic- ipants noted that the full effects of monetary tightening had likely yet to be observed, though several highlighted the possibility that much of the effect of past monetary policy tightening may have already been realized. Re- garding downside risks to economic activity, participants noted the possibility that the cumulative and rapid tight- ening of monetary policy would eventually affect eco- nomic activity more than expected, and that the addi- tional effects of the tightening of bank credit conditions could prove more substantial than anticipated. Regard- ing risks to inflation, with inflation remaining well above the Committee’s longer-run goal, some participants mentioned the possibility that longer-term inflation ex- pectations could become unanchored, particularly in light of stronger-than-expected consumer demand and a still-tight labor market. Several participants cited the possibility of delayed effects of tighter credit conditions potentially contributing to a slowdown in economic ac- tivity that reduces inflationary pressures. In their consideration of appropriate monetary policy ac- tions at this meeting, participants concurred that while inflation had moderated since the middle of 2022, it re- mained well above the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. Economic activity had continued to expand at a modest pace. The labor market remained very tight, with robust job gains in recent months and the unem- ployment rate still low, but there were some signs that supply and demand in the labor market were coming into better balance. The economy was facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions, including higher interest rates, for households and businesses, which would likely weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, al- though the extent of these effect remained uncertain. Against this backdrop, and in consideration of the sig- nificant cumulative tightening in the stance of monetary policy and the lags with which policy affects economic activity and inflation, almost all participants judged it ap- propriate or acceptable to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 to 5¼ percent at this meeting. Most of these participants observed that leaving the tar- get range unchanged at this meeting would allow them more time to assess the economy’s progress toward the Committee’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. Some participants indicated that they favored raising the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting or that they could have supported such a proposal. The participants favoring a 25 basis point increase noted that the labor market remained very tight, momentum in economic activity had been stronger than earlier anticipated, and there were few clear signs that inflation was on a path to return to the Committee’s 2 percent objective over time. All participants agreed that it was appropriate to continue the process of reduc- ing the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, as de- scribed in its previously announced Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet. In discussing the policy outlook, all participants contin- ued to anticipate that, with inflation still well above the Committee’s 2 percent goal and the labor market re- maining very tight, maintaining a restrictive stance for monetary policy would be appropriate to achieve the Committee’s objectives. Almost all participants noted that in their economic projections that they judged that additional increases in the target federal funds rate dur- ing 2023 would be appropriate. Most participants ob- served that uncertainty about the outlook for the econ- omy and inflation remained elevated and that additional Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ information would be valuable for considering the ap- propriate stance of monetary policy. Many also noted that, after rapidly tightening the stance of monetary pol- icy last year, the Committee had slowed the pace of tight- ening and that a further moderation in the pace of policy firming was appropriate in order to provide additional time to observe the effects of cumulative tightening and assess their implications for policy. Participants agreed that their policy decisions at every meeting would con- tinue to be based on the totality of incoming information and its implications for the economic outlook as well as the balance of risks. They also emphasized the im- portance of communicating to the public their data- dependent approach. Most participants observed that postmeeting communications, including the SEP, would help clarify their assessment regarding the stance of monetary policy that is likely to be appropriate to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. Participants also discussed several risk-management considerations that could bear on future policy deci- sions. Almost all participants stated that, with inflation still well above the Committee’s longer-run goal and the labor market remaining tight, upside risks to the inflation outlook or the possibility that persistently high inflation might cause inflation expectations to become unan- chored remained key factors shaping the policy outlook. Even though economic activity had been resilient re- cently and that the labor market remained strong, some participants commented that there continued to be downside risks to economic growth and upside risks to unemployment. Despite the receding of the stresses in the banking sector, some participants commented that it would be important to monitor whether developments in the banking sector lead to further tightening of credit conditions and weigh on economic activity. Some par- ticipants noted concerns about the potential risks stem- ming from weakness in commercial real estate. A number of participants observed that the resolution of the federal government debt limit had removed one source of significant uncertainty for the economic out- look. A few participants noted that there could be some upward pressure on money market rates in the near term as the Treasury issued more bills to meet expenditures and return the balance in the TGA to the Treasury’s pre- ferred level. Those participants observed that upward pressure on money market rates relative to the rate of- fered on the ON RRP facility could lead to a decline in usage of the facility. Committee Policy Actions In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had continued to expand at a modest pace. They also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unem- ployment rate had remained low. Inflation had remained elevated. Members concurred that the U.S. banking system was sound and resilient. They also agreed that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. Members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to in- flation risks. Members agreed that the Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 per- cent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the members agreed to maintain the target range for the fed- eral funds rate at 5 to 5¼ percent. Members agreed that holding the target range steady at this meeting allowed the Committee to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. In determining the ex- tent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, members con- curred that they will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which mon- etary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. In addition, members agreed that the Committee will continue to re- duce the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securi- ties and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed secu- rities, as described in its previously announced plans. All members affirmed that they are strongly committed to returning inflation to their 2 percent objective. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. They would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Mem- bers also agreed that their assessments will take into ac- count a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international develop- ments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the Minutes of the Meeting of June 13–14, 2023Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective June 15, 2023, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 5 to 5¼ percent. • Conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. • Conduct standing overnight reverse repur- chase agreement operations at an offering rate of 5.05 percent and with a per-counter- party limit of $160 billion per day. • Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon the principal payments are monthly cap. than less • Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Recent indicators suggest that economic activ- ity has continued to expand at a modest pace. Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Inflation remains elevated. The U.S. banking system is sound and resilient. Tighter credit conditions for households and businesses are likely to weigh on economic ac- tivity, hiring, and inflation. The extent of these effects remains uncertain. The Committee re- mains highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 to 5¼ per- cent. Holding the target range steady at this meeting allows the Committee to assess addi- tional information and its implications for mon- etary policy. In determining the extent of addi- tional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumula- tive tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial devel- opments. In addition, the Committee will con- tinue reducing its holdings of Treasury securi- ties and agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. The Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on labor market conditions, in- flation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michael S. Barr, Michelle W. Bowman, Lisa D. Cook, Austan D. Goolsbee, Patrick Harker, Philip N. Jefferson, Neel Kashkari, Lorie K. Logan, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 5.15 percent, effective June 15, 2023. The Board also voted unanimously to Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ approve the establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 5.25 percent. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 25–26, 2023. The meeting adjourned at 10:20 a.m. on June 14, 2023. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on May 23, 2023, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on May 2–3, 2023. _______________________ Joshua Gallin Secretary Minutes of the Meeting of June 13–14, 2023Page 11_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee July 25–26, 2023 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, July 25, 2023, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, July 26, 2023, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michael S. Barr Michelle W. Bowman Lisa D. Cook Austan D. Goolsbee Patrick Harker Philip N. Jefferson Neel Kashkari Lorie K. Logan Christopher J. Waller Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, and Loretta J. Mester, Alternate Members of the Committee Susan M. Collins, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Kelly J. Dubbert and Kathleen O’Neill Paese, Interim Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City and St. Louis, respectively Joshua Gallin, Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Richard Ostrander, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, James A. Clouse, Eric M. Engen, Anna Paulson, Andrea Raffo, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Roberto Perli, Manager, System Open Market Account Julie Ann Remache, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account David Altig, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Penelope A. Beattie,2 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board Brent Bundick, Senior Research and Policy Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Juan C. Climent, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Stephanie E. Curcuru,3 Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Matthew J. Eichner,4 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Eric C. Engstrom, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs and Division of Research and Statistics, Board Huberto M. Ennis, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Erin E. Ferris, Principal Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Jennifer Gallagher, Assistant to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Peter M. Garavuso, Senior Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Carlos Garriga, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended through the discussion of the economic and finan- cial situation and all of Wednesday’s session. 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 4 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Page 1 Christine Graham,5 Special Adviser to the Board, Paolo A. Pesenti, Director of Monetary Policy Division of Board Members, Board Research, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Luca Guerrieri, Associate Director, Division of Damjan Pfajar, Group Manager, Division of Monetary International Finance, Board Affairs, Board Christopher J. Gust, Associate Director, Division of Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Vice President, Monetary Affairs, Board Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Donald Keith Sill, Senior Vice President, Federal Monetary Affairs, Board Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Jane E. Ihrig, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Nitish Ranjan Sinha, Special Adviser to the Board, Board Members, Board Division of Board Members, Board Callum Jones, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Dafina Stewart, Special Adviser to the Board, Division Affairs, Board of Board Members, Board Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Gustavo A. Suarez, Assistant Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Research and Statistics, Board David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Director, Division Brett Takacs, Senior Communications Analyst, of Research and Statistics, Board Division of Information Technology, Board Sylvain Leduc, Director of Research, Federal Reserve Jenny Tang, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Bank of San Francisco Boston Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Willem Van Zandweghe, Assistant Vice President, Stability, Board Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Kurt F. Lewis, Special Adviser to the Board, Division Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, Senior Adviser, Division of of Board Members, Board Monetary Affairs, Board Dan Li, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Jeffrey D. Walker,4 Associate Director, Division of Affairs, Board Laura Lipscomb, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board David López-Salido, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Juan M. Morelli, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Norman J. Morin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Michelle M. Neal, Head of Markets, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 5 Attended through the discussion of the economic and finan- cial situation. Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Paul R. Wood, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rebecca Zarutskie, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. Market participants interpreted data releases as generally demonstrating economic resilience and a further easing of inflation pressures. The market-implied peak for the federal funds rate rose in response to data pointing to a robust economy but retraced part of that move after the June consumer price index (CPI) release was interpreted by market participants as softer than anticipated. Even as market prices shifted to indicate a slightly more re- Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ strictive expected policy path, broader financial condi- tions eased a bit, reflecting in large part gains in equity prices and tighter credit spreads. Notably, share prices for bank equity also appreciated over the intermeeting period as concerns about the banking sector continued to dissipate. Spot and forward measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities were little changed over the intermeeting pe- riod at levels broadly consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term survey- and market-based measures continued to point to inflation expectations being firmly anchored. Market-implied peak policy rates in most advanced foreign economies (AFEs) rose further this period, and the dollar depreci- ated modestly. Respondents to the Open Market Desk’s Survey of Pri- mary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants in July continued to place significant probability of a recession occurring by the end of 2024. However, the timing of a recession expected by survey respondents was again pushed later, and the probability of avoiding a recession through 2024 grew noticeably. Survey respondents an- ticipated that both headline and core personal consump- tion expenditures (PCE) inflation will decline to 2 per- cent by the end of 2025. There was a strong anticipation, evident in both market- based measures and responses to the Desk’s surveys, that the Committee would raise the target range 25 basis points at the July FOMC meeting. Most survey respond- ents had a modal expectation that a July rate hike would be the last of this tightening cycle, although most re- spondents also perceived that additional monetary pol- icy tightening after the July FOMC meeting was possible. As inferred from their responses, survey respondents ex- pected real rates to increase through the first half of 2024 and to remain above their expectations for the long-run neutral levels for a few years. The manager then turned to money market develop- ments and policy implementation. The overnight re- verse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility contin- ued to work as intended over the intermeeting period and had been instrumental in providing an effective floor under the federal funds rate and supporting other money market rates; those rates remained stable over the period. Following the suspension of the debt ceiling in early June, the Treasury Department issued securities, notably Treasury bills, to replenish the Treasury General Account (TGA). The resulting greater availability of Treasury bills, which were priced at rates slightly above the current and expected ON RRP rates, induced a net decline in ON RRP balances for the period. A further decline in ON RRP balances was deemed probable amid sustained projected Treasury bill issuance, further reduc- tions in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in accordance with the previously announced Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet, and a possible further reduction in policy uncer- tainty that could incentivize money funds to extend the duration of their portfolios. In the July Desk Survey of Primary Dealers, respondents expected lower ON RRP balances and higher bank reserves by the end of the year, compared with the June survey. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The information available at the time of the July 25–26 meeting suggested that real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a moderate pace over the first half of the year. The labor market remained very tight, though the imbalance between demand and supply in the labor mar- ket was gradually diminishing. Consumer price infla- tion—as measured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for PCE—remained elevated in May, and available information suggested that inflation declined but remained elevated in June. In the second quarter, total nonfarm payroll employ- ment posted its slowest average monthly increase since the recovery began in mid-2020, though payroll gains re- mained robust compared with those seen before the pandemic. Similarly, the private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turn- over Survey, fell in May to its lowest level since March 2021 but remained well above pre-pandemic levels. The unemployment rate edged down to 3.6 percent in June, while the labor force participation rate and the employ- ment-to-population ratio were both unchanged. The unemployment rates for African Americans and Hispan- ics, however, both rose and were well above the national average. Average hourly earnings rose 4.4 percent over the 12 months ending in June, compared with a year- earlier increase of 5.4 percent. Consumer price inflation continued to show signs of easing but remained elevated. Total PCE price inflation was 3.8 percent over the 12 months ending in May, and core PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in en- ergy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.6 per- cent over the same period. The trimmed mean measure _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 25–26, 2023Page 3 of 12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 4.6 percent in May. In June, the 12-month change in the CPI was 3.0 per- cent, while core CPI inflation was 4.8 percent over the same period. Measures of short-term inflation expecta- tions had moved down alongside actual inflation but re- mained above pre-pandemic In contrast, measures of medium- to longer-term inflation expecta- tions were in the range seen in the decade before the pandemic. levels. Available indicators suggested that real GDP rose in the second quarter at a pace similar to the one posted in the first quarter. However, private domestic final pur- chases—which includes PCE, residential investment, and business fixed investment and which often provides a better signal of underlying economic momentum than does GDP—appeared to have decelerated in the second quarter. Manufacturing output rose in the second quar- ter, supported by a robust increase in motor vehicle pro- duction. After falling sharply in April, real exports of goods picked up in May, led by higher exports of industrial sup- plies and automotive products. Real goods imports fell, as lower imports of consumer goods and industrial sup- plies more than offset higher imports of capital goods. The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed, as a sharp decline in nominal imports of goods and services outpaced a decline in exports. The available data sug- gested that net exports subtracted from U.S. GDP growth in the second quarter. Indicators of economic activity, such as purchasing man- agers indexes (PMIs), pointed to a step-down in the pace of foreign growth in the second quarter, reflecting fading of the impetus from China’s reopening, continued ane- mic growth in Europe, some weakening of activity in Canada and Mexico, as well as weak external demand and the slump in the high-tech industry weighing on many Asian economies. Incoming data also indicated that global manufacturing activity remained weak during the intermeeting period. Foreign headline inflation continued to fall, reflecting, in part, the pass-through of previous declines in commod- ity prices to retail energy and food prices. Core inflation edged down in many countries but generally remained high. In this context, and amid tight labor market con- ditions, many AFE central banks raised policy rates and underscored the need to raise rates further, or hold them at sufficiently restrictive levels, to bring inflation in their countries back to their targets. In contrast, central banks of emerging market economies largely remained on hold, and some indicated that a rate cut is possible at their next meeting. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, market participants inter- preted domestic economic data releases as indicating continued resilience of economic activity and some eas- ing of inflationary pressures, and they viewed monetary policy communications as pointing to somewhat more restrictive policy than expected. The market-implied path for the federal funds rate rose modestly, and nom- inal Treasury yields increased somewhat at shorter ma- turities. Meanwhile, broad equity prices increased, and spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed moderately. Financing conditions con- tinued to be generally restrictive, and borrowing costs remained elevated. Over the intermeeting period, the market-implied path for the federal funds rate rose modestly, while the timing of the path’s slightly higher peak moved a little later, to just after the November meeting. Beyond this year, the policy rate path implied by overnight index swap (OIS) quotes ended the period modestly higher. Yields on Treasury securities increased modestly at shorter matur- ities but only a bit at longer maturities. Measures of in- flation compensation rose only slightly for near-term and longer maturities. Measures of uncertainty about the path of the policy rate derived from interest rate op- tions remained very elevated by historical standards. Broad stock price indexes increased and spreads on in- vestment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds nar- rowed moderately over the intermeeting period. The VIX—the one-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500—edged down and ended the period near the 25th percentile of its historical distribution. Bank equity prices increased and outperformed the S&P 500 mod- estly. Stock prices for the largest banks fully recovered from their declines in the immediate wake of the failure of Silicon Valley Bank, while those for regional banks remained below the levels seen in early March. Short-term interest rates in the AFEs increased mod- estly, on net, over the intermeeting period as foreign cen- tral banks continued to raise policy rates and signal the potential for further tightening. Increases in yields were tempered, however, by downside surprises to both infla- tion and PMIs from some economies. Risk sentiment in foreign markets improved somewhat, with most foreign equity indexes increasing and foreign corporate and emerging market sovereign bond spreads narrowing. The staff’s trade-weighted broad dollar index declined moderately, with the largest moves following releases of Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ weaker-than-expected U.S. labor market data and lower- than-expected U.S. inflation data. Conditions in domestic short-term funding markets re- mained generally stable over the intermeeting period. Spreads in unsecured markets narrowed modestly amid slight increases in OIS rates. Following the suspension of the debt limit, the Treasury Department partly replen- ished the TGA via a large net increase in bill issuance. Auctions of Treasury bills were met with robust demand, as shorter-term bill yields increased relative to other money market rates. Money market funds increased their holdings of Treasury bills and reduced their invest- ments with the ON RRP facility. ON RRP take-up de- clined notably—about $390 billion—over the intermeet- ing period, reflecting more attractive rates on some al- ternatives to investing in the ON RRP facility. Despite reduced ON RRP take-up, money funds maintained rel- atively high asset allocations in overnight repurchase agreement investments amid still-elevated uncertainty about the future path of policy. In domestic credit markets, borrowing costs for busi- nesses, households, and municipalities were little changed over the intermeeting period and remained ele- vated by historical standards. Yields on agency commer- cial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) were little changed. The banking sector’s ability to fund loans to businesses and consumers was generally stable during the inter- meeting period. Core deposit volumes at both large and other domestic banks held steady at the levels that they reached in early May, after having declined sharply in March and April amid the banking-sector turmoil. Banks continued to attract inflows of large time depos- its, reflecting higher interest rates offered on new certif- icates of deposit. Meanwhile, wholesale borrowing— which primarily consists of advances from Federal Home Loan Banks, loans from the Bank Term Funding Program, and other credit extended by the Federal Re- serve—had fallen since May by domestic banks of all sizes, partially reversing the surge at the onset of the bank turmoil in March. Credit availability for businesses appeared to tighten somewhat in recent months. Credit from capital mar- kets was somewhat subdued but overall remained acces- sible for larger corporations. Issuance of leveraged loans remained limited, reflecting low levels of leveraged buy- out and merger and acquisition activity as well as weak investor demand. In the municipal bond market, gross issuance was solid in June, as both refundings and new capital issuance picked up from a somewhat subdued May. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loan balances contracted modestly in the second quarter, and commer- cial real estate (CRE) loan growth on banks’ books con- tinued to moderate. In the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), banks reported having tightened standards and terms on C&I loans to firms of all sizes in the second quarter. The most cited reason for tightening C&I standards and terms continued to be concerns about the economic outlook. Banks also re- ported expecting to tighten C&I standards further over the remainder of the year. The July SLOOS also indicated that standards across all CRE loan categories tightened further in the second quarter and that banks expected to tighten CRE stand- ards further over the second half of the year. Meanwhile, CMBS issuance picked up a bit in May and then ticked down in June after recording low volumes earlier in the year. Credit in the residential mortgage market remained broadly available for high-credit-score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. Only modest net percentages of banks in the July SLOOS reported tightening standards for mortgage loans eligible to be purchased by government-sponsored enterprises, while a moderate net percentage of banks reported expecting to tighten lending standards further for these loans over the second half of the year. Meanwhile, the availability of mortgage credit remained tighter for households with lower credit scores, at levels close to those prevailing be- fore the pandemic. Banks reported in the SLOOS that they had tightened standards for certain categories of residential real estate loans to be held on their balance sheets, such as jumbo loans and home equity lines of credit. In addition, banks reported expecting to tighten standards for jumbo loans during the remainder of 2023. Conditions remained generally accommodative in con- sumer credit markets, with credit available for most bor- rowers. Credit card balances increased in the second quarter, though at a somewhat slower pace than in pre- vious months. In the July SLOOS, banks reported ex- pecting to continue tightening lending standards for credit card loans. Overall, the credit quality of most businesses and house- holds remained solid. While there were signs of deteri- oration in credit quality in some sectors, such as the of- fice segment of CRE, delinquency rates generally re- mained near their pre-pandemic lows. The credit quality _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 25–26, 2023Page 5 of C&I and CRE loans on banks’ balance sheets re- mained sound as of the end of the first quarter of 2023. However, in the July SLOOS, banks frequently cited concerns about the credit quality of both CRE and other loans as reasons for expecting to tighten their lending standards over the remainder of the year. Aggregate de- linquency rates on pools of commercial mortgages back- ing CMBS increased in May and June. The staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, charac- terized the financial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as notable. The staff judged that asset valuation pressures remained notable. In particular, measures of valuations in both residential and commercial property markets remained high relative to fundamentals. House prices, while having cooled earlier this year, started to rise again, and price-to-rent ratios remained at elevated levels and near those seen in the mid-2000s. Although commercial property prices moved down, developments in the CRE sector following the pandemic may have pro- duced a permanent shift away from traditional working patterns. If so, fundamentals in the sector could decline notably and contribute to a deterioration in credit qual- ity. The staff assessed that vulnerabilities associated with household and nonfinancial business leverage remained moderate overall. Aggregate household debt growth re- mained in line with income growth. While nonfinancial businesses remained highly leveraged and thus vulnera- ble to shocks, firms’ debt growth has been relatively sub- dued recently, and their ability to service that debt has been quite high, even among lower-rated firms. Lever- age in the financial sector was characterized as notable. In the banking sector, regulatory risk-based capital ratios showed the system remained well capitalized. However, while the overall banking system retained ample loss- bearing capacity, some banks experienced sizable de- clines in the fair value of their assets as a consequence of rising interest rates. Vulnerabilities associated with funding risks were also characterized as notable. Al- though a small number of banks saw notable outflows of deposits late in the first quarter and early in the second quarter, deposit flows later stabilized. Staff Economic Outlook The economic forecast prepared by the staff for the July FOMC meeting was stronger than the June projection. Since the emergence of stress in the banking sector in mid-March, indicators of spending and real activity had come in stronger than anticipated; as a result, the staff no longer judged that the economy would enter a mild recession toward the end of the year. However, the staff continued to expect that real GDP growth in 2024 and 2025 would run below their estimate of potential output growth, leading to a small increase in the unemployment rate relative to its current level. The staff continued to project that total and core PCE price inflation would move lower in coming years. Much of the step-down in core inflation was expected to occur over the second half of 2023, with forward-looking indi- cators pointing to a slowing in the rate of increase of housing services prices and with core nonhousing ser- vices prices and core goods prices expected to decelerate over the remainder of 2023. Inflation was anticipated to ease further over 2024 as demand–supply imbalances continued to resolve; by 2025, total PCE price inflation was expected to be 2.2 percent, and core inflation was expected to be 2.3 percent. The staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were tilted to the downside. Risks to the staff’s baseline inflation forecast were seen as skewed to the upside, given the possibility that infla- tion dynamics would prove to be more persistent than expected or that further adverse shocks to supply condi- tions might occur. Moreover, the additional monetary policy tightening that would be necessitated by higher or more persistent inflation represented a downside risk to the projection for real activity. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In their discussion of current economic conditions, par- ticipants noted that economic activity had been expand- ing at a moderate pace. Job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate remained low. Inflation remained elevated. Participants agreed that the U.S. banking system was sound and resilient. They commented that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on eco- nomic activity, hiring, and inflation. However, partici- pants agreed that the extent of these effects remained uncertain. Against this background, the Committee re- mained highly attentive to inflation risks. In assessing the economic outlook, participants noted that real GDP growth had continued to exhibit resilience in the first half of the year and that the economy had been showing considerable momentum. A gradual slow- down in economic activity nevertheless appeared to be in progress, consistent with the restraint placed on de- mand by the cumulative tightening of monetary policy since early last year and the associated effects on finan- Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ cial conditions. Participants remarked on the uncer- tainty about the lags in the effects of monetary policy on the economy and discussed the extent to which the ef- fects on the economy stemming from the tightening that the Committee had undertaken had already materialized. Participants commented that monetary policy tightening appeared to be working broadly as intended and that a continued gradual slowing in real GDP growth would help reduce demand–supply imbalances in the economy. Participants assessed that the ongoing tightening of credit conditions in the banking sector, as evidenced in the most recent surveys of banks, also would likely weigh on economic activity in coming quarters. Participants noted the recent reduction in total and core inflation rates. However, they stressed that inflation remained unacceptably high and that further evidence would be required for them to be confident that inflation was clearly on a path toward the Committee’s 2 percent ob- jective. Participants continued to view a period of be- low-trend growth in real GDP and some softening in la- bor market conditions as needed to bring aggregate sup- ply and aggregate demand into better balance and reduce inflation pressures sufficiently to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Participants noted that consumer spending had recently exhibited considerable resilience, underpinned by, in ag- gregate, strong household balance sheets, robust job and income gains, a low unemployment rate, and rising con- sumer confidence. Nevertheless, tight financial condi- tions, primarily reflecting the cumulative effect of the Committee’s shift to a restrictive policy stance, were ex- pected to contribute to slower growth in consumption in the period ahead. Participants cited other factors that were likely leading to, or appeared consistent with, a slowdown in consumption, including the declining stock of excess savings, softening labor market conditions, and increased price sensitivity on the part of customers. Some participants observed that recent increases in home prices suggested that the housing sector’s re- sponse to monetary policy restraint may have peaked. In their discussion of the business sector, participants cited various improvements in firms’ cost structures. These included better-functioning supply chains, lower input costs, and an increased ability to hire and retain workers. Participants also discussed conditions that could lead to higher economic activity—such as leaner inventories and reduced expectations of a sharp eco- nomic slowdown—and factors that could lead to lower economic activity—such as continuing economic uncer- tainty, the vulnerabilities of the CRE market, and the on- going weakness of manufacturing output. Participants judged that, over coming quarters, firms would reduce the pace of their investment spending and hiring in re- sponse to tight financial conditions and the slowing of economic activity. Participants remarked that the labor market continued to be very tight but pointed to signs that demand and supply were coming into better balance. They noted ev- idence that labor demand was easing—including de- clines in job openings, lower quits rates, more part-time work, slower growth in hours worked, higher unemploy- ment insurance claims, and more moderate rates of nominal wage growth. In addition, they remarked on indications of increasing labor supply, including a fur- ther rise in the prime-age participation rate to a post- pandemic high. Participants also observed, however, that although growth in payrolls had slowed recently, it continued to exceed values consistent over time with an unchanged unemployment rate, and that nominal wages were still rising at rates above levels assessed to be con- sistent with the sustained achievement of the Commit- tee’s 2 percent inflation objective. Participants judged that further progress toward a balancing of demand and supply in the labor market was needed, and they ex- pected that additional softening in labor market condi- tions would take place over time. Participants cited a number of tentative signs that infla- tion pressures could be abating. These signs included some softening in core goods prices, lower online prices, evidence that firms were raising prices by smaller amounts than previously, slower increases in shelter prices, and recent declines in survey estimates of shorter- term inflation expectations and of inflation uncertainty. Various participants discussed the continued stability of longer-term inflation expectations at levels consistent with 2 percent inflation over time and the role that the Committee’s policy tightening had played in delivering this outcome. Nonetheless, several participants com- mented that significant disinflationary pressures had yet to become apparent in the prices of core services exclud- ing housing. Participants observed that, notwithstanding recent fa- vorable developments, inflation remained well above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-term objective and that el- evated inflation was continuing to harm businesses and households—low-income families in particular. Partici- pants stressed that the Committee would need to see more data on inflation and further signs that aggregate demand and aggregate supply were moving into better balance to be confident that inflation pressures were _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 25–26, 2023Page 7 abating and that inflation was on course to return to 2 percent over time. Participants generally noted a high degree of uncertainty regarding the cumulative effects on the economy of past monetary policy tightening. Participants cited upside risks to inflation, including those associated with scenar- ios in which recent supply chain improvements and fa- vorable commodity price trends did not continue or in which aggregate demand failed to slow by an amount sufficient to restore price stability over time, possibly leading to more persistent elevated inflation or an unan- choring of inflation expectations. In discussing down- side risks to economic activity and inflation, participants considered the possibility that the cumulative tightening of monetary policy could lead to a sharper slowdown in the economy than expected, as well as the possibility that the effects of the tightening of bank credit conditions could prove more substantial than anticipated. In their discussion of financial stability, participants ob- served that the banking system was sound and resilient and that banking stress had calmed in recent months. Participants also noted that the most recent stress-test results indicated that large banks appeared to be well po- sitioned to withstand a severe recession. Various partic- ipants commented on risks that could affect some banks, including unrealized losses on assets resulting from ris- ing interest rates, significant reliance on uninsured de- posits, and increased funding costs. Participants also commented on risks associated with a potential sharp decline in CRE valuations that could adversely affect some banks and other financial institutions, such as in- surance companies, that are heavily exposed to CRE. Several participants noted the susceptibility of some nonbank financial institutions, such as money market funds or digital asset entities, to runs or instability. In addition, several participants emphasized the need for banks to establish readiness to use Federal Reserve li- quidity facilities and for the Federal Reserve to ensure its own readiness to provide liquidity during periods of stress. In their consideration of appropriate monetary policy ac- tions at this meeting, participants concurred that eco- nomic activity had been expanding at a moderate pace. The labor market remained very tight, with robust job gains in recent months and the unemployment rate still low, but there were continuing signs that supply and de- mand in the labor market were coming into better bal- ance. Participants also noted that tighter credit condi- tions facing households and businesses were a source of headwinds for the economy and would likely weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. However, the extent of these effects remained uncertain. Although in- flation had moderated since the middle of last year, it remained well above the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent, and participants remained resolute in their commitment to bring inflation down to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Amid these economic conditions, almost all participants judged it appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 5¼ to 5½ per- cent at this meeting. Participants noted that this action would put the stance of monetary policy further into re- strictive territory, consistent with reducing demand–sup- ply imbalances in the economy and helping to restore price stability. A couple of participants indicated that they favored leaving the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged or that they could have supported such a proposal. They judged that maintaining the cur- rent degree of restrictiveness at this time would likely re- sult in further progress toward the Committee’s goals while allowing the Committee time to further evaluate this progress. All participants agreed that it was appro- priate to continue the process of reducing the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings, as described in its previ- ously announced Plans for Reducing the Size of the Fed- eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet. A number of participants noted that balance sheet runoff need not end when the Committee eventually begins to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate. In discussing the policy outlook, participants continued to judge that it was critical that the stance of monetary policy be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective over time. They noted that uncertainty about the economic outlook remained elevated and agreed that policy decisions at future meet- ings should depend on the totality of the incoming in- formation and its implications for the economic outlook and inflation as well as for the balance of risks. Partici- pants expected that the data arriving in coming months would help clarify the extent to which the disinflation process was continuing and product and labor markets were reaching a better balance between demand and sup- ply. This information would be valuable in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be ap- propriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Par- ticipants also emphasized the importance of communi- cating as clearly as possible about the Committee’s data- dependent approach to policy and its firm commitment to bring inflation down to its 2 percent objective. Participants discussed several risk-management consid- erations that could bear on future policy decisions. With inflation still well above the Committee’s longer-run goal Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ and the labor market remaining tight, most participants continued to see significant upside risks to inflation, which could require further tightening of monetary pol- icy. Some participants commented that even though economic activity had been resilient and the labor mar- ket had remained strong, there continued to be down- side risks to economic activity and upside risks to the unemployment rate; these included the possibility that the macroeconomic effects of the tightening in financial conditions since the beginning of last year could prove more substantial than anticipated. A number of partici- pants judged that, with the stance of monetary policy in restrictive territory, risks to the achievement of the Com- mittee’s goals had become more two sided, and it was important that the Committee’s decisions balance the risk of an inadvertent overtightening of policy against the cost of an insufficient tightening. Committee Policy Actions In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had been ex- panding at a moderate pace. They also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the un- employment rate had remained low. Inflation had re- mained elevated. Members concurred that the U.S. banking system was sound and resilient. They also agreed that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. Members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to infla- tion risks. In support of the Committee’s objectives to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 per- cent over the longer run, members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 5¼ to 5½ per- cent. They also agreed that they would continue to as- sess additional information and its implications for mon- etary policy. In determining the extent of additional pol- icy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, members concurred that they will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects eco- nomic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. In addition, members agreed to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury se- curities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. All members affirmed that they are strongly com- mitted to returning inflation to their 2 percent objective. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. They would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Mem- bers also agreed that their assessments will take into ac- count a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international develop- ments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective July 27, 2023, the Federal Open Mar- ket Committee directs the Desk to: • Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 5¼ to 5½ percent. • Conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. • Conduct standing overnight reverse repur- chase agreement operations at an offering rate of 5.3 percent and with a per-counter- party limit of $160 billion per day. • Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon the principal payments are monthly cap. than less • Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. _____________________________________________________________________________________________Minutes of the Meeting of July 25–26, 2023Page 9 • Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Recent indicators suggest that economic activ- ity has been expanding at a moderate pace. Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. In- flation remains elevated. The U.S. banking system is sound and resilient. Tighter credit conditions for households and businesses are likely to weigh on economic ac- tivity, hiring, and inflation. The extent of these effects remains uncertain. The Committee re- mains highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 5¼ to 5½ percent. The Committee will continue to assess addi- tional information and its implications for mon- etary policy. In determining the extent of addi- tional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumula- tive tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial devel- opments. In addition, the Committee will con- tinue reducing its holdings of Treasury securi- ties and agency debt and agency mortgage- backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. The Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on labor market conditions, in- flation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michael S. Barr, Michelle W. Bowman, Lisa D. Cook, Austan D. Goolsbee, Patrick Harker, Philip N. Jefferson, Neel Kashkari, Lorie K. Logan, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 5.4 per- cent, effective July 27, 2023. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to ap- prove a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 5.5 percent, effective July 27, 2023.6 It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, September 19– 20, 2023. The meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on July 26, 2023. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on July 3, 2023, the Com- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com- mittee meeting held on June 13–14, 2023. _______________________ Joshua Gallin Secretary 6 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- lish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Fed- eral Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Rich- mond, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. The vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 5.5 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of July 27, 2023, or the date such Reserve Banks inform the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Atlanta were informed of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 5.5 percent, effective July 27, 2023.) Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee September 19–20, 2023 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- tem was held in the offices of the Board of Governors on Tuesday, September 19, 2023, at 10:30 a.m. and con- tinued on Wednesday, September 20, 2023, at 9:00 a.m.1 Attendance Jerome H. Powell, Chair John C. Williams, Vice Chair Michael S. Barr Michelle W. Bowman Lisa D. Cook Austan D. Goolsbee Patrick Harker Philip N. Jefferson Neel Kashkari Adriana D. Kugler Lorie K. Logan Christopher J. Waller Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Mary C. Daly, and Loretta J. Mester, Alternate Members of the Committee Susan M. Collins and Jeffrey R. Schmid, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Kansas City, respectively Kathleen O’Neill Paese, Interim President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Joshua Gallin, Secretary Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Brian J. Bonis, Assistant Secretary Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Richard Ostrander, Deputy General Counsel Trevor A. Reeve, Economist Stacey Tevlin, Economist Beth Anne Wilson, Economist Shaghil Ahmed,2 Roc Armenter, James A. Clouse, Brian M. Doyle, Eric M. Engen,3 Andrea Raffo, Chiara Scotti, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Roberto Perli, Manager, System Open Market Account Julie Ann Remache, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account Stephanie R. Aaronson, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Jose Acosta, Senior System Administrator II, Division of Information Technology, Board Andrea Ajello, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Penelope A. Beattie,4 Section Chief, Office of the Secretary, Board Ellen J. Bromagen, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Mark A. Carlson, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Daniel Cooper, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Stephanie E. Curcuru, Deputy Director, Division of International Finance, Board Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Matthew J. Eichner,5 Director, Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Eric C. Engstrom, Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Division of Board Members, Board Charles A. Fleischman, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board 1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the “FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes; the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is referenced as the “Board” in these minutes. 2 Attended Wednesday’s session only. 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 4 Attended through the discussion of the economic and finan- cial situation. 5 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan- cial markets and open market operations. Page 1_____________________________________________________________________________________________ Glenn Follette, Associate Director, Division of Raven Molloy, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Research and Statistics, Board Jennifer Gallagher, Assistant to the Board, Division of Michelle M. Neal, Head of Markets, Federal Reserve Board Members, Board Bank of New York Carlos Garriga, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Anna Orlik, Principal Economist, Division of Bank of St. Louis Monetary Affairs, Board Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision Damjan Pfajfar, Group Manager, Division of Monetary and Regulation, Board Affairs, Board Joseph W. Gruber, Executive Vice President, Federal Pierre-Daniel G. Sarte, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve Reserve Bank of Kansas City Bank of Richmond Valerie S. Hinojosa, Section Chief, Division of Nitish Ranjan Sinha, Special Adviser to the Board, Monetary Affairs, Board Division of Board Members, Board Matteo Iacoviello,3 Senior Associate Director, Division Dafina Stewart, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of International Finance, Board of Board Members, Board Jane E. Ihrig, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Clara Vega, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Board Members, Board Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Jeffrey D. Walker,5 Associate Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Don H. Kim,5 Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Edward S. Knotek II, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Spencer Krane, Senior Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability, Board Paul Lengermann, Assistant Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board Kurt F. Lewis, Special Adviser to the Board, Division Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board Min Wei, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Jonathan Willis, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Donielle A. Winford, Information Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Paul R. Wood, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Rebecca Zarutskie, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board of Board Members, Board Andrei Zlate, Group Manager, Division of Monetary Dan Li, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Laura Lipscomb, Special Adviser to the Board, Division of Board Members, Board Zheng Liu, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco David López-Salido, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Jonathan P. McCarthy, Economic Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board Affairs, Board Developments in Financial Markets and Open Market Operations The manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. U.S. data releases generally pointed to greater economic resilience than previously thought, and the reaction in market pric- ing implied both a higher expected trajectory for the pol- icy rate at longer horizons and higher term premiums. Policy-sensitive rates rose moderately, and longer-dated forward rates displayed larger increases. Ten-year Treas- ury yields ended the period more than 40 basis points higher, and broad measures of equity prices fell. Bank equity prices underperformed over the period, but taking a somewhat longer view, investor sentiment toward the Page 2Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ banking sector appeared to have largely stabilized, with less differentiation of equity price movements across bank types. The dollar broadly appreciated against ad- vanced-economy currencies over the period, as stronger U.S. data supported moderately increased yield differen- tials against these economies amid perceptions that pol- icy rates were at or near their peaks. In China, signs of strain in the property sector increased, and optimism about growth diminished further, on net, although broader markets, including global commodity markets, did not appear to show elevated concern about China- related risks. U.S. financial conditions tightened, with higher longer-term rates, lower equity prices, and a stronger dollar contributing roughly equally to the in- crease in various financial conditions indexes. In addressing the increase in nominal yields on longer- run Treasury securities over the intermeeting period, the manager noted that the rise in real yields exceeded that of nominal yields over the period, implying a small de- cline in inflation compensation. Inflation expectations appeared to remain very well anchored. Market partici- pants cited various factors for the rise in longer-term nominal yields, including stronger-than-expected eco- nomic data, a possible increase in the neutral policy rate, greater economic and policy uncertainty, and larger- than-expected borrowing by the Treasury. Household and corporate borrowing rates increased over the period, generally rising in line with Treasury yields. Still, market participants noted that, with house- hold and corporate borrowers having a limited need to refinance debt in the near term, it could take more time for past monetary policy actions to fully pass through to these sectors. Regarding expectations for the September FOMC meet- ing, the manager noted that responses to the Open Mar- ket Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants and market pricing all pointed to a virtual certainty of no change in the policy rate. In addi- tion, modal expectations for the policy rate from the sur- veys were that the current target range would be main- tained until the May 2024 FOMC meeting, compared with March in the previous survey, with a roughly one- in-three chance of a 25 basis point increase by the No- vember FOMC meeting. For horizons beyond the mid- dle of next year, the modal path from the surveys was notably lower than the market-implied path. The manager turned next to developments in money markets and Desk operations. Usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility contin- ued to decline over the intermeeting period, largely re- flecting reduced participation by government and prime money market funds even as these funds continued to see inflows. Increased supply of money market instru- ments, especially Treasury bills, contributed to a slight increase in money market rates, which appeared to in- duce money funds to shift away from ON RRP toward other instruments. However, the ON RRP facility con- tinued to provide an effective floor for the federal funds rate. With ON RRP balances falling more than Federal Reserve assets, reserve balances grew over the period. At more than $3.3 trillion, reserves remained abundant. In the September Survey of Primary Dealers, respond- ents generally saw a lower path for ON RRP participa- tion and a higher path for reserves, compared with the July survey. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- riod. Staff Review of the Economic Situation The data available at the time of the September 19–20 meeting suggested that real gross domestic product (GDP) was rising at a solid pace in the third quarter. The labor market continued to be tight, with the unemploy- ment rate low and job gains slowing but remaining strong. Consumer price inflation was still elevated. The imbalance between labor demand and supply ap- peared to be easing. Total nonfarm payroll employment increased at a slower pace over July and August than in the second quarter. The private-sector job openings rate and the quits rate, both measured by the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, moved down further through July. Over July and August, the unemployment rate edged up, on net, and stood at 3.8 percent in August, and both the labor force participation rate (LFPR) and the employment-to-population ratio rose slightly. The unemployment rate for African Americans declined, while the jobless rate for Hispanics rose, and both rates were still above the national average. The easing of labor market imbalances was also evident in the recent wage data, with the 12-month changes in average hourly earn- ings and the employment cost index, and the four-quar- ter change in business-sector compensation per hour all lower than their year-earlier levels. Consumer price inflation remained elevated but contin- ued to show signs of slowing. The total price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased 3.3 percent over the 12 months ending in July, and core Minutes of the Meeting of September 19–20, 2023Page 3_____________________________________________________________________________________________ PCE price inflation, which excludes changes in energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.2 percent over the same period; both total and core PCE price in- flation were lower than a year earlier. The trimmed mean measure of 12-month PCE price inflation con- structed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas was 4.1 percent in July, down from its level earlier in the year. In August, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (CPI) was 3.7 percent, while core CPI inflation was 4.3 percent over the same period, and both total and core CPI inflation were well below their year-earlier lev- els. Survey measures of consumers’ short-term inflation expectations had moved down alongside actual inflation but remained above pre-pandemic levels. In contrast, survey measures of medium- to longer-term inflation ex- pectations remained in the range seen in the decade be- fore the pandemic. Available indicators suggested that real GDP was ex- panding at a solid pace in the third quarter. Private do- mestic final purchases—which includes PCE, residential investment, and business fixed investment (BFI) and of- ten provides a better signal of underlying economic mo- mentum than does GDP—also looked to be rising sol- idly, led by gains in both PCE and BFI. After falling in the second quarter, real goods exports increased in July, supported by higher exports of auto- motive products. Real goods imports also rose, as im- ports of consumer goods and capital goods partially re- covered from their declines in recent months. The nom- inal U.S. international trade deficit widened, as growth in imports of goods and services outpaced that of exports. Foreign economic growth slowed in the second quarter, as troubles in the property sector weighed on economic activity in China and monetary policy restraint contrib- uted to the slowing in economic growth in Europe. Available data for the third quarter, such as purchasing managers indexes and measures of business confidence, pointed to a continued subdued pace of economic activ- ity abroad. Foreign headline inflation continued to fall but remained elevated. In several economies, though, energy prices turned up again. In the context of still-high core infla- tion, some central banks in advanced foreign economies (AFEs) raised their policy rates, despite a slowdown in economic activity, and indicated their intention to hold these rates at sufficiently restrictive levels to bring infla- tion back to target rates. In contrast, central banks of emerging market economies largely remained on hold, and some even began to cut rates amid easing inflation- ary pressures. Staff Review of the Financial Situation Over the intermeeting period, generally robust eco- nomic data led to moderate increases in the market- implied path of the federal funds rate and yields on shorter-term Treasury securities. Yields on medium- and longer-term nominal Treasury securities rose more substantially, mainly reflecting higher term premiums and higher real yields. Stock prices declined somewhat, but spreads on investment- and speculative-grade cor- porate bonds were little changed. Financing conditions tightened somewhat, and borrowing costs increased moderately. Market participants pointed to a range of factors that may have contributed to the increase in longer-term for- ward rates, including higher term premiums and upward revisions to market views of the likely path of Treasury debt over time. Real yields increased almost as much as or a little more than nominal yields, leaving implied measures of inflation compensation modestly changed. The market-implied path for the federal funds rate in the near term was up slightly since the July FOMC meeting, and the expected path further out, implied by overnight index swap contracts, rose moderately. Broad equity price indexes declined somewhat, and the one-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 in- dex edged up slightly, on net, and stood near the 25th percentile of its historical distribution. Conditions in domestic short-term funding markets re- mained stable over the intermeeting period. Both prime and government money market funds experienced mod- erate inflows since the July FOMC meeting. Against a backdrop of heavy issuance of Treasury bills and the modest associated upward pressure on Treasury bill yields, take-up in the ON RRP facility continued to de- cline over the period and fell below $1.5 trillion late in the period. Over the intermeeting period, the dollar appreciated, as U.S. economic data came in stronger than expected, while foreign data suggested slowing economic growth abroad. Long-term yields in AFEs ended the period higher, reflecting spillovers from higher U.S. yields and, to a lesser extent, the increase in Japanese yields follow- ing the decision by the Bank of Japan to effectively widen its target range for the 10-year Japanese yield. Global equity prices declined moderately, reflecting higher long-term yields and increased concerns about the foreign economic outlook. Bond and equity funds focused on emerging markets saw moderate outflows. Page 4Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ In domestic credit markets, borrowing rates for busi- nesses, households, and municipalities increased moder- ately over the intermeeting period, mostly reflecting a pass-through of higher yields on longer-maturity Treas- ury securities to those borrowing rates. Interest rates on newly originated bank loans to businesses and house- holds increased over the second quarter, interest rates on credit card offers increased in July, and interest rates on auto loans increased in July and August. Bank credit conditions appeared to tighten somewhat over the intermeeting period, but credit to businesses and households remained generally accessible. Com- mercial and industrial loan balances contracted, but out- standing commercial real estate (CRE) loans increased from July through late August, though at a slower pace than earlier in the year. Within the category of CRE loans, nonfarm nonresidential loans contracted over the summer for the first time since March 2022. Bank fund- ing conditions were generally stable. Core deposits de- clined but were offset by inflows of large time deposits. Credit was available for most consumers. Credit card balances grew in the second quarter through late August. For residential real estate borrowers, credit availability was little changed. Credit conditions for small busi- nesses were also fairly stable. The PayNet Small Busi- ness Lending Index indicated that loan originations edged up in July and stood above the median of its pre- pandemic level. Credit was generally accessible through capital markets, although issuance was subdued. Issu- ance of nonfinancial investment- and speculative-grade bonds was muted in July but picked up modestly in Au- gust, and issuance of municipal bonds was weak in July. New issuance of leveraged loans was subdued in July, and issuance of agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) was soft in July and August. Credit quality deteriorated a little further across many sectors in recent months but remained broadly solid. In the CRE sector, delinquency rates on nonfarm nonresi- dential CRE bank loans rose over the second quarter, while delinquency rates on construction, land develop- ment, and multifamily loans were roughly unchanged. Delinquency rates of loans in CMBS pools increased, driven by the office and retail sectors. The office delin- quency rate rose more than 2 percentage points since January but remained below its pre-pandemic average. The delinquency rate for small business loans ticked up in June and July. Delinquency rates for credit cards and auto loans increased further in the second quarter and stood a bit above their average levels in the years leading up to the pandemic. The fraction of potential borrowers with a prime credit score expanded through the second quarter, moving further above its pre-pandemic level. The trailing default rates for investment- and specula- tive-grade corporate bonds increased in July but re- mained at historically low levels. The trailing default rate for leveraged loans was little changed, on net, but down- grades of leveraged loans surpassed upgrades in July and August. In contrast to many other types of loans, the payment performance of home mortgages improved. Delin- quency rates of Federal Housing Administration and Department of Veterans Affairs loans in July were lower than levels seen earlier this year, and delinquency rates of conventional loans remained at historical lows. Credit quality was also strong for municipal borrowers. Staff Economic Outlook The economic forecast prepared by the staff for the Sep- tember FOMC meeting was stronger than the July pro- jection, as consumer and business spending appeared to be more resilient to tight financial conditions than pre- viously expected. The staff assumed that GDP growth for the rest of this year would be damped a bit by the autoworkers’ strike, with these effects unwound by a small boost to GDP growth next year. The size and tim- ing of these effects were highly uncertain. In all, the staff projected that real GDP growth in 2024 through 2026 would be slower, on average, than this year and would run below the staff’s estimate of potential output growth, restrained over the next couple of years by the lagged effects of monetary policy actions. The unem- ployment rate was projected to remain roughly flat through 2026, as upward pressure from below-potential output growth was offset by downward pressure from further improvements in labor market functioning. Total and core PCE price inflation were forecast to be around 3.5 percent at the end of this year, and inflation was projected to move lower in coming years, as demand and supply in product and labor markets continued to move into better alignment. Total and core PCE price inflation were expected to be close to 2 percent in 2026. The staff continued to view the uncertainty around the baseline projection as considerable. Risks around the in- flation forecast were seen as skewed to the upside, given the possibility that inflation could prove to be more per- sistent than expected or that further adverse shocks to supply conditions might occur. Should these upside in- flation risks materialize, the response of monetary policy could, if coupled with an adverse reaction in financial Minutes of the Meeting of September 19–20, 2023Page 5_____________________________________________________________________________________________ markets, tilt the risks around the forecast for economic activity to the downside. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- tion for each year from 2023 through 2026 and over the longer run. The projections were based on their individ- ual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, includ- ing the path of the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. A Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. Regarding the economic outlook, participants assessed that real GDP had been expanding at a solid pace and had been more resilient than expected. Nevertheless, participants also noted that they expected that real GDP growth would slow in the near term. Participants judged that the current stance of monetary policy was restrictive and that it broadly appeared to be restraining the econ- omy as intended. Participants stressed that current in- flation remained unacceptably high while acknowledging that it had moderated somewhat over the past year. They also noted that further evidence would be required for them to be confident that inflation was clearly on a path to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Partici- pants continued to view a period of below-trend growth in real GDP and some softening in labor market condi- tions as likely to be needed to bring aggregate demand and aggregate supply into better balance and reduce in- flation pressures sufficiently to return inflation to 2 per- cent over time. In their discussion of the household sector, participants observed that aggregate consumer spending had contin- ued to exhibit considerable strength, supported by the strong labor market and by generally strong household balance sheets. However, many participants remarked that the finances of some households were coming un- der pressure amid high inflation and declining savings and that there had been an increasing reliance on credit to finance expenditures. In addition, tighter credit con- ditions, waning fiscal support for families, and a resump- tion of student loan payments were viewed by several participants as having the potential to weigh on the growth of consumption. While household credit quality was seen as generally strong, a few participants noted ris- ing delinquency rates on some types of consumer credit. A couple of participants also remarked that households were becoming increasingly price sensitive. Some par- ticipants noted that housing demand was resilient de- spite higher interest rates; new home construction was solid, in part reflecting the limited inventory of homes available for sale. Regarding the business sector, participants noted that activity continued to be solid, though several pointed to signs of softening conditions. Many participants noted improved business conditions from an increased ability to hire and retain workers, better-functioning supply chains, or reduced input cost pressures. A few partici- pants commented that their business contacts had re- ported difficulties passing on cost increases to custom- ers. Several participants judged that, over coming quar- ters, business activity would be restrained by tighter fi- nancial conditions, such as higher interest rates and more constrained access to bank credit. Several partici- pants noted, however, that the tightening of credit con- ditions resulting from the banking stresses earlier in the year was likely to be less severe than they previously ex- pected. A number of participants expressed concerns about vulnerabilities in the CRE sector. Many partici- pants commented that they expected that the autowork- ers’ strike would, in the near term, result in a slowdown in production of motor vehicles and parts and possibly put upward pressure on automobile prices, but that these effects would be temporary. With respect to the agricul- tural sector, a few participants noted that conditions were mixed, as crop prices had declined amid higher pro- duction estimates and as supply and demand imbalances pushed up the prices of some types of livestock and held down the prices of others. Participants observed that the labor market was tight but that supply and demand conditions were continuing to come into better balance. Most participants remarked that a range of indicators of labor demand were easing— as could be seen by declines in job openings, a narrowing of the jobs-to-workers gap, lower quits rates, and a re- duction in average weekly hours worked to levels at or below those seen before the pandemic. However, sev- eral participants noted that labor markets remained very tight in some sectors of the economy, such as health- care services and education. Many participants also ob- served that measures of labor supply, especially the LFPR, had moved up. Some participants commented that the increase in the LFPR for women had been par- ticularly notable, although they expressed concern that challenges regarding the availability of childcare could Page 6Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ affect the sustainability of this increase in participation. Several participants noted that immigration had also been boosting labor supply. Some participants observed that payroll growth remained strong but had slowed in recent months to a pace closer to that consistent with maintaining a constant unemployment rate over time. Most participants commented that the pace of nominal wage increases had moderated, and a few also mentioned that the wage premium for job switchers had come down. They noted, however, that nominal wages were still rising at rates above levels generally assessed to be consistent with the sustained achievement of the Com- mittee’s 2 percent inflation objective, given current esti- mates of trend productivity growth. Participants noted that the data received over the past several months generally suggested that inflation was slowing. Even with these favorable developments, they emphasized that further progress was needed to get in- flation sustainably to 2 percent. Participants pointed to the softening of price inflation for goods amid improv- ing supply conditions and to declining housing services inflation. Several participants remarked that, despite the recent rise in energy prices, food and energy prices over the past year had contributed to a decline in overall in- flation. However, participants also noted that significant progress in reducing inflation had yet to become appar- ent in the prices of core services excluding housing. Par- ticipants noted that longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored and that shorter-term inflation expectations had been moving down from elevated lev- els. Participants observed that, notwithstanding recent favorable developments, inflation remained well above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective and that elevated inflation was continuing to harm businesses and households—particularly low-income households. Par- ticipants stressed that they would need to see more data indicating that inflation pressures were abating to be more confident that inflation was on course to return to 2 percent over time. Participants generally noted there was still a high degree of uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. One new source of uncertainty was that associated with the autoworkers’ strike, and many participants observed that an intensification of the strike posed both an upside risk to inflation and a downside risk to activity. A majority of participants pointed to upside risks to inflation from rising energy prices that could undo some of the recent disinflation or to the risk that inflation would prove more persistent than expected. Various participants noted downside risks to economic activity, including that credit conditions might tighten more than expected if the domestic banking sector experienced further strains; the possibility that the economic slowdown in China could result in a drag on global economic growth; or that an extended U.S. government shutdown could have negative, albeit temporary, consequences for growth. Some participants remarked that an upside risk to their projections for economic activity was that the unexpected resilience that the economy had demon- strated so far could persist. Several participants com- mented that a government shutdown might result in the delayed release of some economic data and that this out- come would make it more difficult to assess economic conditions. A few participants observed that there were challenges in assessing the state of the economy because some data continued to be volatile and subject to large revisions. In their consideration of appropriate monetary policy ac- tions at this meeting, participants concurred that eco- nomic activity had been expanding at a solid pace and had been resilient. While the labor market remained tight, job gains had slowed, and there were continuing signs that supply and demand in the labor market were coming into better balance. Participants also noted that tighter credit conditions facing households and busi- nesses were a source of headwinds for the economy and would likely weigh on economic activity, hiring, and in- flation. However, the extent of these effects remained uncertain. Although inflation had moderated since the middle of last year, it remained well above the Commit- tee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent, and participants re- mained resolute in their commitment to bring inflation down to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Amid these economic conditions, and in consideration of the significant cumulative tightening in the stance of mone- tary policy and the lags with which policy affects eco- nomic activity and inflation, almost all participants judged it appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent at this meeting. Participants judged that maintaining this restrictive stance of policy would support further progress toward the Committee’s goals while allowing the Committee time to gather additional data to evaluate this progress. All participants agreed that it was appropriate to con- tinue the process of reducing the Federal Reserve’s se- curities holdings, as described in its previously an- nounced Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Re- serve’s Balance Sheet. In discussing the policy outlook, participants continued to judge that it was critical that the stance of monetary policy be kept sufficiently restrictive to return inflation Minutes of the Meeting of September 19–20, 2023Page 7_____________________________________________________________________________________________ to the Committee’s 2 percent objective over time. A ma- jority of participants judged that one more increase in the target federal funds rate at a future meeting would likely be appropriate, while some judged it likely that no further increases would be warranted. All participants agreed that the Committee was in a position to proceed carefully and that policy decisions at every meeting would continue to be based on the totality of incoming information and its implications for the economic out- look as well as the balance of risks. Participants expected that the data arriving in coming months would help clar- ify the extent to which the disinflation process was con- tinuing and labor markets were reaching a better balance between demand and supply. This information would be valuable in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time. Some participants also emphasized the importance of continuing to communicate clearly to the public about the Committee’s data-dependent ap- proach to policy and its firm commitment to bring infla- tion down to 2 percent. All participants agreed that policy should remain restric- tive for some time until the Committee is confident that inflation is moving down sustainably toward its objec- tive. A few participants noted that the pace at which inflation was returning to the Committee’s 2 percent goal would influence their views of the sufficiently re- strictive level of the policy rate and how long to keep policy restrictive. Several participants commented that, with the policy rate likely at or near its peak, the focus of monetary policy decisions and communications should shift from how high to raise the policy rate to how long to hold the policy rate at restrictive levels. A few partic- ipants noted that it would be important to monitor the real federal funds rate in gauging the stance of monetary policy over time. Most participants observed that postmeeting communications, including the SEP, would help clarify to the public how participants assessed the likely evolution of the stance of monetary policy. Par- ticipants observed that the continuing process of reduc- ing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet was an important part of the overall approach to achieving their macroeconomic objectives. Several participants noted that the process of balance sheet runoff could continue for some time, even after the Committee be- gins to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate. A vast majority of participants continued to judge the future path of the economy as highly uncertain. Many noted data volatility and potential data revisions, or the difficulty of estimating the neutral policy rate, as sup- porting the case for proceeding carefully in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be ap- propriate. Participants discussed several risk-management consid- erations that could bear on future policy decisions. Par- ticipants generally judged that, with the stance of mone- tary policy in restrictive territory, risks to the achieve- ment of the Committee’s goals had become more two sided. But with inflation still well above the Committee’s longer-run goal and the labor market remaining tight, most participants continued to see upside risks to infla- tion. These risks included the imbalance of aggregate demand and supply persisting longer than expected, as well as risks emanating from global oil markets, the po- tential for upside shocks to food prices, the effects of a strong housing market on shelter inflation, and the po- tential for more limited declines in goods prices. Many participants commented that even though economic ac- tivity had been resilient and the labor market had re- mained strong, there continued to be downside risks to economic activity and upside risks to the unemployment rate. Such risks included larger-than-anticipated lagged macroeconomic effects from the tightening in financial conditions, the effect of labor union strikes, slowing global growth, and continued weakness in the CRE sec- tor. Participants generally noted that it was important to balance the risk of overtightening against the risk of in- sufficient tightening. Committee Policy Actions In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had been ex- panding at a solid pace, and, accordingly, that the corre- sponding language in the postmeeting statement should be changed from “moderate” to “solid.” They also con- curred that job gains had slowed in recent months but remained strong, and the unemployment rate had re- mained low. Inflation had remained elevated. Members concurred that the U.S. banking system was sound and resilient. They also agreed that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. Members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to infla- tion risks. In support of the Committee’s objectives to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 per- cent over the longer run, members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent. They also agreed that they would continue to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. In determining the extent of additional Page 8Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, members concurred that they would take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy af- fects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. In addition, members agreed to continue to reduce the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and mortgage- backed securities, as described in its previously an- nounced plans. All members affirmed that they are strongly committed to returning inflation to their 2 per- cent objective. Members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. They would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. Mem- bers also agreed that their assessments will take into ac- count a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international develop- ments. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee voted to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Effective September 21, 2023, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to:  Undertake open market operations as nec- essary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 5¼ to 5½ percent.  Conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion.  Conduct standing overnight reverse repur- chase agreement operations at an offering rate of 5.3 percent and with a per-counter- party limit of $160 billion per day.  Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold- ings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are the monthly cap. than less  Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed se- curities (MBS) the amount of principal pay- ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month.  Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settle- ment of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions.” The vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “Recent indicators suggest that economic activ- ity has been expanding at a solid pace. Job gains have slowed in recent months but remain strong, and the unemployment rate has re- mained low. Inflation remains elevated. The U.S. banking system is sound and resilient. Tighter credit conditions for households and businesses are likely to weigh on economic ac- tivity, hiring, and inflation. The extent of these effects remains uncertain. The Committee re- mains highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum em- ployment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent. The Committee will continue to assess additional information and its implica- tions for monetary policy. In determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects eco- nomic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. In addition, the Com- mittee will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. The Committee is Minutes of the Meeting of September 19–20, 2023Page 9_____________________________________________________________________________________________ strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on labor market conditions, in- flation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. Williams, Michael S. Barr, Michelle W. Bowman, Lisa D. Cook, Austan D. Goolsbee, Patrick Harker, Philip N. Jefferson, Neel Kashkari, Adriana D. Kugler, Lorie K. Logan, and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against this action: None. Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 5.4 percent, effective Septem- ber 21, 2023. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to approve the es- tablishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 5.5 percent, effective September 21, 2023. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, October 31– The meeting adjourned at November 1, 2023. 10:10 a.m. on September 20, 2023. Notation Vote By notation vote completed on August 15, 2023, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Committee meeting held on July 25–26, 2023. _______________________ Joshua Gallin Secretary Page 10Federal Open Market Committee_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 



